A power free electrodialysis (PFED) for desalination

Fabao Luo a,b, Yaoming Wang a, Chenxiao Jiang a, Bin Wu a, Hongyan Feng a, Tongwen Xu a,

a Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials, School of Chemistry and Material Science, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, PR China
b Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei Normal University, Hefei 230061, PR China

H I G H L I G H T S

 A power free electrodialysis (PFED) for
water desalination was explored.
 The PFED can achieve a synergistic en-
hancement effect on water desalination.
 The PFED realize zero discharge of high
salt wastewater.
 The conductivity of fresh water can be
as low as 72 米S cm 1.

article

info

Article history:
Received 12 August 2016
Received in revised form 8 October 2016
Accepted 7 November 2016
Available online 16 November 2016

Keywords:
Power free
Reverse electrodialysis
Electrodialysis
Desalination
Process integration


abstract

A power free electrodialysis (PFED) is proposed for water desalination by integrating with a reverse electrodial-
ysis (RED) as an energy donor. The effects of ow rates, salt concentration ratio between high salt concentration
compartment (HC) and low salt concentration compartment (LC) on energy generation are investigated. The
combination of ED and RED for fresh water production is attempted and the desalination performances in both
continuous and batch-wise modes are investigated. The results show that the integration is feasible and the con-
ductivity of the product water can be as low as 72 米S/cm, which is indubitably qualied for drinking. To test the
robustness of this hybrid technology, the batch-wise mode is chosen to generate power from simulated seawater
and wastewater. It is found that the PFED can be successfully carried with no signicant desalination difference
compared to NaCl solution. PFED is thus conrmed to be technically feasible, and economically attractive for
water desalination without the consumption of external energy.

 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

The requirement for fresh water is going up substantially due to the
increase of human being and industrial growth in many parts of the
world [1,2]. Desalination technologies can greatly alleviate water short-
age problems [3每6]. Currently, either thermal (phase-change) processes
or membrane processes are used for water desalination with a negative
impact on the environment due to their intensive energy consumption
and concentrated brine disposal [7]. As one of the desalination technol-
ogies, Electrodialysis (ED) can produce both freshwater and table salt
from salty water with the aids of ion exchange membranes and direct


139

Nomenclature

A
ac
ad
AEM
b
Cc
Cd
Cm
CEM
dc
dd

EOCV

Ex

ED
F
HC
I
LC
N
N`
P

Pgross
Pmax
Pnet
Ppump

PFED
Q
Qc
Qd
R
Ra

RBL

Rc

Rel
Rload
Rohmic
Rstack
R忖 C

RED
T
V
z

汐

汛

汍sp

百c

百d

忖 pc
忖 pd.

effective area of a single membrane (m2)
activity of the concentrated salt solution (mol/L)
activity of the diluted salt solution (mol/L)
anion exchange membrane
compartment width (cm)
the concentration of HC (mol/L)
the concentration of LC (mol/L)
the mix average concentration (mol/L)
cation exchange membrane
the thickness of HC (cm)
the thickness of LC (cm)
theoretical open stack circuit potential (V)
the maximum released energy of mixing the two salt
solutions(W)
electrodialysis
Faraday constant (96,485 C/mol)
high salt concentration compartment
current (A)
low salt concentration compartment
number of cell pairs for RED
number of repeating units for ED
output power (W)
maximum gross power density (W/m2)
maximum output power (W)
net power density (W/m2)
power density consumed for pumping (W/m2)
power free electro dialysis
volumetric ow rate (mL/min)
volumetric ow rate of HC (L/s)
volumetric ow rate of LC (L/s)
gas constant (8.314 J/mol/K)
the resistance of anion exchange membrane (次/cm 2)
boundary layer resistance (次)
the resistance of cation exchange membrane (次/cm 2)
the resistance of electrodes (次)
load resistance (次)
Ohmic resistance (次)
stack resistance (次)
concentration difference resistance (次)
reverse electrodialysis
absolute temperature (K)
line ow velocity (cm/min)
electrochemical valence
average membrane permselectivity of an anion and a
cation exchange membrane pair
spacer thickness (cm)
spacer porosity
the specic conductivity of the concentrated solution
(mS/cm)
the specic conductivity of the diluted solution (mS/
cm)
the pressure drops along HC (KPa)
the pressure drops along LC (KPa)

current [8]. Due to the utilization of electricity, the energy consumption
accounts for almost half of total process cost, such as energy cost, capital
investment, and operational and maintenance cost, etc. [5,7,9]. Besides,
in some isolated locations, remote areas, or islands, an electricity supply
is not reliable and the water scarcity becomes even more severe [10].
Therefore, some renewable energy such as solar, wind and geothermal
energy were used to drive the desalination processes. Due to the expen-
sive equipment and complicated technologies, the production cost of

the fresh water by these renewable energy is often much higher than
that by the conventional energy. However, considering the shortage of
fossil fuel energy, renewable energy is receiving much more attention
for water desalination [3,7,11,12].
Reverse electrodialysis (RED) is an emerging renewable energy
technology to generate electrical power from two salinity gradient solu-
tions [13每15]. It uses ion-exchange membrane for ion transport based
on the concentration difference as driving force. The ionic diffusive
ux generates an electrochemical potential recorded as a voltage across
electrodes. Electrodes receive the ions and convert into an electrical cur-
rent with an oxidation or reduction reaction. The generated electrical
current can be collected by an external load. Thus, RED process can har-
vest clean energy from the ambient environment in an economically
competitive manner. The pioneering work in the eld of RED was prov-
en by Pattle [16], who used an apparatus called hydroelectric pile to
generate electric power. In order to improve the power density, the
ion exchange membrane formation and membrane stack structure de-
signs were the hotspots of RED researches [17每20]. Recently, a mem-
brane stack was designed with two parts of RED and ED for energy
self-sufcient desalination. This self-desalination process is appropriate
for changing the brine water into fresh water on small islands [21].
However, there are limited reports on the in-situ combination of RED
and ED for water desalination, except for some integration process sup-
plying the high salt water for RED [22每24]. These few reported self-de-
salination with ED and RED in the same stack usually has a poor
desalination performance and a synergistic intensication of two pro-
cesses is not achieved.
Herein, a power free electrodialysis (PFED) is designed by an in-situ
combination of ED and RED unit. RED is used as the energy donor and
ED is used as the energy acceptor. As a consequence, this hybrid process
can abandon the use of cumbersome batteries or external power sup-
plies as well as the disposal of concentrated brines. A full-scale RED
module is very similar to that of conventional ED, which is consisted
of high salt concentration compartment (HC), low salt concentration
compartment (LC), ion-exchange membranes and electrode rinse solu-
tions. This process intensication of ED and RED can achieve a synergis-
tic enhancement effect on water desalination. On one hand, the
concentrated brine output from ED can be fed into HC of RED, thus fur-
ther enhancing the power output; on the other hand, LC of RED in the
integrated system can be supplied even from the life wastewater, so
freshwater can be obtained in an economically competitive manner.

2. Theory and experiment

2.1. Theory

The theoretical value of the potential over an ion exchange mem-
brane for an aqueous monovalent ion solution (e.g. NaCl) can be calcu-
lated using the Nernst equation in Eq. (1) [25每27]:

1

EOCV  N

2汐RT
zF

ln

 

ac
ad

where EOCV is the theoretical open stack circuit potential (V), 汐 is the av-
erage membrane permselectivity of an anion and a cation exchange
membrane pair, N is the number of cell pairs, R is the gas constant
(8.314 J/mol/K), T is the absolute temperature (K), z is the electrochem-
ical valence, F is the Faraday constant (96,485 C/mol), ac is the activity of
the concentrated salt solution (mol/L) and ad is the activity of the dilut-
ed salt solution (mol/L). The power produced is related to the electro-
chemical potential drop across the membrane, EOCV, and an external
load resistance resulting in Eq. (2) [25,28]:

P  I2 Rload 

EOCV
2
Rstack  Rload



2 Rload

2

140

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

In this equation, P is the output power (W); I is the current (A); Rload
and Rstack are the resistances of the load and stack resistance (次),
respectively.
The maximum power output of the system is obtained when Rload
equals to the resistance of the stack (Rstack) [25]. Thus, the maximum
output power can be simplied into Eq. (3),

Pmax  EOCV
2
4Rstack

3

Consequently, the power density (power output per unit membrane
area, Pgross) can be calculated from Pmax [25], as shown in Eq. (4).

P gross  Pmax

2AN

 EOCV
2
8ANRstack

4

where Pgross is the maximum gross power density (W/m2), Pmax is max-
imum output power (W), A is effective area of a single membrane (m2).
The presence of spacers will signicantly decrease the power output
due to the loss of the membrane area from non-conductive spacer
blockage.
The total resistance of an RED stack includes those of electrodes,
electrolytes, diffusion boundary layers at the membrane surface, and
membranes. Simplied models neglect the resistance of diffusion
boundary layers or combine its contribution with membrane resistance
and express the overall resistance(次) as Eq. (5) [15,19,26],





Rstack  N

A

Ra  Rc  dc

 dd
百 d

百 c

 Rel

5

where A is the effective membrane area (cm2); Ra is the resistance (次/
cm 2) of anion exchange membrane (AEM); Rc is the resistance (次/
cm 2) of cation exchange membrane (CEM); Rel is the resistance (次)
of electrodes; dc is the thickness (cm) of HC; dd is the thickness of LC;
百c is the specic conductivity (mS/cm) of the concentrated solution;
and 百d is the specic conductivity (mS/cm) of the diluted solution.
Then, due to the concentration change of the different ow paths of a
cell after ion migration, the resistances of all the different positions are
multipliable with the exception of the electrodes [29]. The electrode re-
sistance may be considered negligible if the stack cells are scaled larger
than 20 but with only two electrodes [19]. Considering the effect of the
salinity gradient and the diffusion boundary layer resistance, the entire
RED stack resistance can be expressed as Eq. (6) [30,31],

Rstack  N

A



Rohmic  R忖C  RBL



6

where Rohmic is the membrane resistance ascribed to the ionic transport
through the membranes, which is equal to the one cell resistance
discussed above. R忖C is the resistance ascribed to the reduced
electromotive forces as a consequence of the change in the concentra-
tion of the bulk solution. It considers the change of the solution concen-
tration from the inlet to the outlet of the solution compartment with the
spatial difference of membrane potential. RBL is the boundary layer re-
sistance due to concentration polarization which induced by diffusive
boundary layer near the membranes at lower ow rates. Both R忖C and
RBL are belonged the signicant non-ohmic resistance.
The net power density (Pnet, in W/m2) that is generated by a RED
stack can be calculated as the difference between the gross power den-
sity and the power density consumed for pumping (Ppump, in W/m2) of
both feed waters, which can be calculated from the pressure drop over
the inlet and outlet and the ow rate per cell areas. Thus, the net
power density can be expression as Eq. (7) [22],
忖pcQ c  忖pdQ d
NA

Pnet  P grossPpump  EOCV
2
8ANRstack

7



where 忖 pc and 忖 pd. are the pressure drops along HC and LC, respective-
ly. Qc and Qd are the volumetric ow rates of HC and LC, respectively.
The maximum released energy (Ex) of mixing the two salt solutions
is given by Eq. (8) [32],





Ex  2RT Q c C c ln

C c
Cm

 Q d C d ln

C d
Cm

8

where Cc and Cd are the concentration of HC and LC, respectively. The
mix average concentration Cm is given by Eq. (9),
Cm  Q cC c  Q d C d
Q c  Q d

9

2.2. Experiment section

2.2.1. Experiment operation
The experiments were performed in three steps. At rst, the RED
process was optimized to obtain the optimum experimental conditions
for power generation. Furthermore, a power free electrodialysis (PFED)
was attempted to test the feasibility of this integrated process for water
desalination by using NaCl solution as the feed solution. Finally, the in-
tegrated process was investigated with simulated sea water and waste-
water to test the robustness of this integration in a complicated water
system.

2.2.2. Experiment setup
A lab-scale RED setup was designed and installed in our lab. A sche-
matic diagram of the RED principle was illustrated in Fig. 1a. The RED
setup was composed of (1) a cathode and an anode, which was made
of titanium coated with ruthenium and iridium; (2) different cell pairs
(N = 10 for separated and 20 for integrated operation) of specially pre-
pared cation and anion exchange membranes which were alternatively
arranged; and (3) spacers with thickness of 0.75 mm to separate the
anion and cation exchange membranes. The RED membranes were spe-
cially prepared with a thickness of approximately 50 米m while the ED
membranes were kindly provided from Hefei ChemJoy Polymers Co.,
Ltd., China. The main properties of RED membranes were the same as
those for ED process except for the membrane thickness and listed in
Table 1. The cell pairs were ten and twenty for RED optimization process
and PFED process, respectively. The effective area of each membrane
was 189 cm2. In the RED optimization, three ow streams, i.e. electrode
compartment, high salt concentration compartment (HC), low salt con-
centration compartment (LC) were established. A 500 mL electrode
rinse solution was circulated with a peristaltic pump (BT600L, Lead
uid, China) at a ow rate of 75 mL/min. The same ow rate was main-
tained in HC and LC with two peristaltic pumps (BT600L, Lead uid,
China). The ow stream was ※feed-and-bleed§ pass through the HC
and LC with different velocity (0每700 mL/min).
The ED stack in the PFED process was equipped with the same kinds
of electrodes and spacers as the RED stack but with different repeating
unit (N∩ = 1, 2, and 4) of ordinary ion exchange membranes (CJ-MA-2
and CJ-MC-2). A schematic diagram of the PFED process is illustrated
in Fig. 1b. Three kinds of repeating unit (N∩ = 1, 2, and 4) were com-
pared in ED stack. The pair number of RED stack is twenty in PFED
stack. In the PFED process, ve ow streams were established. They
were ED electrode compartment, low salt concentration compartment
(LC) in ED stack, high salt concentration compartment (HC) in ED
stack, RED electrode compartment, low salt concentration compart-
ment (LC) in RED stack. It should be noted that the ow stream of HC
in ED stack was directly fed into HC in RED to obtain process intensica-
tion. The ED and RED electrode compartments were respectively circu-
lated with a peristaltic pump at a ow rate of 75 mL/min.

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

141

(a) 

(b) 

Fig. 1. A schematic diagram of the principle of (a) reverse electrodialysis, RED and (b) power free electrodialysis, PFED.

2.2.3. Feed solution
To optimize the experiment conditions in RED process, the low salt
concentration compartment (LC) was fed with solutions containing

Table 1
The main characteristics of the membranes used in the experiments.

Properties

CJ-MC-2

CJ-MA-2

Thickness, mm
Ion exchange capacity, mmol/g
Water uptake, %
Resistance, 次/cm2
Transfer number, %
Break stress, MPa

0.200
1.50
35
1.5
98
N 3.5

0.145
1.25
32
1.2
99
N 3.5

1 g/L (or 3 g/L) NaCl; the high salt concentration compartment (HC)
was fed with different concentrations (10 g/L, 30 g/L, 70 g/L, and
150 g/L) of NaCl aqueous solution. The electrode rinse solution in RED
stack was consisted of 0.05 M K3[Fe(CN)6], 0.05 M K4[Fe(CN)6]﹞3H2O
and 0.25 M NaCl aqueous solution, which was circulated in the electrode
compartment at a ow rate of 75 mL/min.
In the PFED process, different amounts of sodium chloride were dis-
solved in deionized water to obtain different levels of conductivities
(2000 米S/cm, 5000 米S/cm and 9000 米S/cm) as the feed of ED stack, re-
spectively. The electrode rinse solution in ED stack is consisted of
0.05 M K3[Fe(CN)6], 0.05 M K4[Fe(CN)6]﹞3H2O and 0.25 M Na2SO4 aque-
ous solution, which was circulated at a ow rate of 75 mL/min. The de-
salination performance was monitored by a conductivity meter (DDS

142

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

307 Conductivity Instruments, Leici Instrument, Shanghai, China). To
test the robustness of PFED in a complicated water system, simulated
seawater and wastewater instead of NaCl were used as feed solutions.
As shown in Fig. 1b, seawater was desalinated with ED part for fresh
water, which was driven by RED part from the concentration difference
of concentrated seawater and waste water. Simulated sea water was
prepared by dissolving 30gseacrystal (Qianjiang Sea Crystal Factory,
Weifang, China) in 1 L deionized water while the wastewater was pre-
pared by dissolving 0.8 g sodium chloride, 0.1 g potassium dihydrogen
phosphate, 0.1 g ammonia chloride, 0.5 g glucose dissolved in 1 L deion-
ized water. All the reagents used were analytical grade and provided by
Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd.

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Optimum of RED

To run up the PFED process with RED as an energy donor, the oper-
ating parameters of RED should be optimized at rst. This section focus-
es on investigation the effects of ow rate and salt concentration
difference between LC and HC on energy generation.

3.1.1. Inuence of ow rate
The line ow velocity (V) can be dened as the mean uid velocity
inside a single spacer-lled channel. It can be estimated by Eq. (10) [33],

V 

Q

N  汛  b  汍 sp

10

where Q is the volumetric ow rate (mL/min) in HC or LC inlet, 汛 is the
spacer thickness(0.075 cm), b is the compartment width (9 cm for the
small stack) and 汍sp is the spacer porosity (75% for the woven spacer
used in this study). For simplicity, the ow rate in the experiment is
expressed as the volumetric ow rate.
Flow rate is one crucial parameter affecting the RED performance,
which can be indicated from the internal resistance (Rstack), open circuit
voltage (EOCV), and power density (Pgross) [29]. To investigate the effect
of ow rate on energy generation, the ow rate ratio of HC and LC was
kept at 1:1. The pair number of membranes in this separated RED
stack is ten. Fig. 2a shows the effects of ow rate on internal resistances
of the RED stack. It can be seen that the resistance initially increases rap-
idly, but then reaches a plateau and thereafter remains relatively con-
stant. At low ow rates (Q b 40 mL/min), the residual time of ow

Fig. 2. Inuence of ow rate on RED performance. (a) Open circuit voltage, (b)internal
resistance, (c) power density. Other experimental conditions: HC, 30 g/L NaCl solution;
LC, 1 g/L NaCl solution

stream in the stack is reduced with an increase of the ow rate. In this
case, the internal resistance is mainly dependent upon the resistance
in LC according to Eq. (5). As a consequence, there is an increasing
trend of resistance with an increase of ow rate. At middle ow rates
(40 mL/min b Q b 170 mL/min), the resistance in LC almost approaches
stable and is not signicantly affected by the ow rate. The internal re-
sistance is more likely to be determined by the resistance ascribed to the
reduced electromotive forces (R忖 C) and the boundary layer resistance
(RBL) as described in Eq. (6). At high ow rates (Q N 170 mL/min), the
boundary layer of the RED stack keeps at a very small constant value.
Both the resistance ascribed to the reduced electromotive forces (R忖 C)
and the boundary layer resistance (RBL) can be neglected. A constant re-
sistance is obtained in this case. Fig. 2b indicates the effects of ow rate
on open circuit voltage. The open circuit voltage increases at rst and
then approaches a constant voltage of 1.4 V. According to Nernst equa-
tion in Eq. (1), the open circuit voltage is highly related to the activities
in the concentrated and diluted salt solution. The boundary layer is rela-
tively laminar at low ow rates (Q b 40 mL/min) which decreases with
an increase in ow rate. Meanwhile, the activity difference between con-
centrated and diluted salt solution is increased with an increase of ow
rate. Therefore, a sharply increase of open circuit voltage is observed in
low ow rate range. At middle ow rates (40 mL/min b Q b 170 mL/min),
the open circuit voltage increases slowly due to deceleration of boundary
layer and the increment of the activities in concentrated and diluted salt
solution. At high ow rates (Q N 170 mL/min), both the boundary layers
thicknesses and activities in concentrated and diluted salt solution will
settle to a steady state. A constant voltage will be maintained in this
case. Fig. 2c indicates the dependence of power density on the ow
rate. The powder density is related to both the internal resistance and
open circuit voltage. It is found that the power density increases at rst
and then becomes stationary, and it reaches the maximum when the
ow rate is 67.5 mL/min (~ 0.22 cm/s line ow velocity). The output
power density is signicantly affected by the activities in the concentrat-
ed and diluted salt solution as well as the thickness of the boundary layer,
and these inuences are more pronounced at low ow rate range. By
considering the internal resistance and open circuit voltage as well as
the power density, the ow rate in the range of 45-180 mL/min is a suit-
able choice for the RED stack. The ow rate in the further experiment is
chosen in this range.

3.1.2. Inuences of the salt concentration difference between LC and HC
The electricity generated by RED is caused by the diffusion of salt ions
from HC into LC. Therefore, the salt concentration in HC and LC has signif-
icant inuences on energy generation. Fig. 3a and Fig. 3b demonstrate
the effects of salt concentration difference between LC and HC on open
circuit voltage and the power density of RED stack under different ow
rate. It should be noted that the number in the legends of Fig. 3 denotes
the weight concentration of salts. For example, LC-HC (1 30) means
the NaCl concentrations in LC and HC are 1 g/L and 30 g/L, respectively.
It is interesting to nd that with an increase in the ow rate, the open cir-
cuit voltage increases more apparently at higher salt concentration dif-
ference. This is due to the change in activities of both concentrated and
diluted salt solution, which is more noticeable at the high ow rate and
high salt concentration. The similar explanation can be applied for the
power density. It is also interesting to nd that the open circuit voltages
increase at rst when the ratio is b 30 but then decrease when the ratio is
larger than 70. The open circuit voltages at LC-HC (1每150) are even
lower than that at LC-HC (1每30) or LC-HC (1每70). This phenomenon
may be attributed to the following reasons. One is the concentration po-
larization [20]. The salt concentration in the boundary layer of LC will be
relatively high when a very high salt concentration is applied in HC.
Therefore, the activity ratio between HC and LC at an extremely high
salt concentration will be lower than that at a moderate salt concentra-
tion. Another one is that the permselectivities of ion exchange mem-
branes are decreased at the case of a high concentration [34].
Meanwhile, different open circuit voltages were obtained for the same

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

143

3.2. Integrating RED and ED with NaCl solution

A power free electrodialysis (PFED) stack was assembled by a com-
bination of RED with ED. To test the feasibility of this integration, aque-
ous sodium chloride solutions were applied as the feed solutions at rst.
RED and ED are acted as a pair of energy's donor and acceptor, respec-
tively. This integration in a closed loop circulation offers several bene-
ts. At rst, it is no energy except pumping will be consumed. The
power consumption for ED comes from two gradient salinity waters in
RED. Furthermore, process intensication can be achieved in this com-
bined process. The concentrated brine from ED can be delivered to the
HC in RED, thus enhancing the power output. The increase of energy
generation in RED can further improve the desalination performance
in ED process. Moreover, it is possible to generate fresh water from
brine by avoiding the directly discharge of the high salinity wastewater.
Because the driven force of ED is generated by the concentration-gradi-
ent in RED, this combined stack can work up when the membrane area
of ED is much less than that of RED. Therefore, the effect of repeating
unit of membrane in ED on the integrated performance was investigat-
ed when the RED cell pair number is xed at twenty. Two operational
modes in ED were considered. One is continuous mode where the
ow stream is ※feed-and-bleed§ pass through the ED stack. The other
is batch-wise mode where the ow stream is circulated in ED stack
with a circulation pump. Fig. 4 illustrates a schematic diagram of these
two operation modes.
Fig. 5 indicates the desalination performance of integrated stack in a
continuous mode under different LC ow rates in ED stack. It should be
noted that the optimum ow rate in RED stack is 67.5 mL/min for a ten
pair of membranes as aforementioned. The ow rates in RED stack in
this integrated stack are xed at 135 mL/min for a twenty pair of mem-
branes. As shown in Fig. 5a, all the conductivities are decreased from the
initial feed conductivity of 2000 米S/cm, indicating the successful accom-
plishment of the power free electrodialysis. The conductivities in the de-
salinated water after the experiments are almost increased with the
increase of the LC ow rate except for the four repeating unit ED stack.
Because the salts and their concentrations in the HC and LC of RED are
xed, the voltage generated by RED is thus constant. The resistance in
the ED stack is folded increase with an increase in the repeating unit
of the membranes. In fact, the RED can be considered as a constant volt-
age ※battery§ while the ED can be considered as a ※load§ resistance. Dur-
ing the experiment, the resistances in the ED stack are always increased
due to the desalination of salt ions. Different desalination performances
are obtained for different repeating unit of ED stack. For one repeating
unit ED stack (N∩ = 1), the ED stack resistance is much less than the
RED internal resistance. This is shown in Fig. 5b since the ED voltage is
only 0.3 V for one repeating unit ED stack. As indicated in Eq. (3), the
maximum power output of the system is obtained when the loading re-
sistance equals to RED stack resistance. In other words, the power out-
put is low when the loading resistance is much higher or less than the
RED stack resistance. Therefore, a poor desalination performance is ob-
tained for one repeating unit ED stack. For two repeating unit ED stack
(N∩ = 2), the ED stack resistance is very close to RED internal resistance.
The ED resistance almost equals to RED internal resistance when the ow
rate in LC of ED stack is 10 mL/min. The best desalination performance is
observed in this case with the lowest conductivity at 736 米S/cm in the de-
salinated water. For four repeating unit ED stack (N∩ = 4), ED resistance is
a slightly higher than RED internal resistance. In this case, the ED resis-
tance with four repeating units is not double compared with that of
two repeating units by considering a relative constant resistance in the
electrode chambers. An increase in membrane area will not lead to an im-
proved desalination performance due to a decrement in current in this
case. Therefore, the desalination performance in four-repeating unit ED
stack is very similar to that of two-repeating unit stack. It is interesting
to nd that desalination performance for four-repeating unit ED stack is
even worse than that for two-repeating unit ED stack when the ow
rate of LC is 10 mL/min. This is due to a relatively laminar boundary

Fig. 3. Inuence of the concentration ratio of high concentration compartment (HC) and
low concentration compartment (LC) on RED performance under different ow rate. (a)
Open circuit voltage, (b) power density. Note. The number in the legends denotes the
weight concentration of NaCl. For example, LC-HC (1每30) means the NaCl
concentrations in LC and HC are 1 g/L and 30 g/L, respectively.

concentration ratio but at different concentration, such as LC-HC (1 10)
and LC-HC (3 30). A lower open circuit voltage for the same concentra-
tion ratio but higher salt concentration is also attributed to the concen-
tration polarization and the permselectivities decrement of the ion
exchange membranes. When it comes to the power density, it is found
that the power densities increase at rst when the concentration ratio
is smaller than 70 and thereafter keep almost constant. The conductivi-
ties in both HC and LC are increased with an increase in concentration.
But open circuit voltages are not further increased when the concentra-
tion ratio is larger than 70 as aforementioned. As a result, the highest
power density is obtained for the LC-HC (1每70). Meanwhile, the power
densities for LC-HC (1每10) are about 30% lower than that for LC-HC
(3每30). This indicates the internal resistance rather than open circuit
voltage is the most prominent factor affecting the power generation. In
addition, the energy generation in Eq. (8) has indicated that the maxi-
mum energy output is mainly determined by ow rate and concentra-
tion in the HC. A high concentration in HC is benecial for the
maximum energy release. But a high power density is required to main-
tain a high energy utilized efciency by considering the energy con-
sumption for pumping according to Eq. (7). Our experiment indicates
that LC-HC (1每30) has a relatively high power density and high energy
utilized efciency as well as the highest open circuit voltage. It is
conformed to the literature [34]. Therefore, the RED stack with LC-HC
(1每30) at the ow rate of 67.5 mL/min is chosen for the further integra-
tion experiments.

144

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

Fig. 4. Schematic diagrams of two operational modes in integrated ED and RED process. (a) Continuous mode; (b) batch-wise mode.

layer in LC of ED stack at such low ow rate. The voltages in ED stack with
different repeating units are shown in Fig. 5b. The more the repeating
units are, the higher the voltage will be, because the loading resistance

Fig. 5. Desalination performance of integrated ED and RED in a continuous mode. (a)
Conductivity of the desalinated water; (b) the voltage of ED. Other experimental
conditions: RED pair number is 20; ow rate in the other compartments are
135 ml/min. Note. The number in the legend denotes the repeating unit in ED stack.

increases with the repeating units. However, with an increase in ow
rate of LC, the resistance is decreased until a plateau value is reached
for each case.
Due to the small membrane area of the experimental stack, the con-
tinuous mode with ※feed-and-bleed§ pass through of ow stream has
relatively high conductivity in the desalted water. To investigate the de-
salination performance of the power free electrodialysis with a much
higher salinity solution, a batch-wise mode was investigated with a con-
ductivity of 9000 米S/cm chloride sodium solution as feed solution. Fig. 6
indicates the desalination performance of integrated stack in a batch-
wise mode for two- and four-repeating unit of ED stacks, respectively.
As shown in Fig. 6a, the conductivity in the feed solution is decreased
with the elapse of time at each case. Finally, conductivity of the desali-
nated water decreased to ~ 72 米S/cm from the initial 9000 米S/cm, indi-
cating the high desalination capacity. But the desalination capacity is
not proportional to the repeating unit in the ED stack, as conrmed by
the fact that the experiment period with four-repeating unit ED stack
is not half of that with two-repeating unit ED stack. Because the ED
stack occupies only a fractional part of the PFED stack. This can be indi-
cated by the voltages in the ED stack, as shown in Fig. 6b. It is noted that
the voltages in the ED stack increase slowly at rst but then rapidly. In
the initial period of experiment, the ED stack resistance is lower than
RED resistance. However, the ED resistance continuously increases
with the PFED experiment. In the later period of experiment, the ED
stack resistance will overwhelm the RED stack. In this case, the ED
stack resistance will become the dominant contribution to the integrat-
ed stack resistance. This result illustrates that only increase the repeat-
ing unit in ED stack is not sufcient for an improved desalination
performance in the PFED process. It is suggested that a high-effective
PFED should be operated when ED stack resistance is equal to RED
resistance.

3.3. Integrating RED and ED with simulated sea water and wastewater

The concept of PFED is successfully veried in the above section. To
test the robustness of this integration at a complicate feed solution, in-
tegrated RED and ED with simulated sea water and wastewater was
also investigated. The integrated experiment was performed in a
batch-wise mode with four-repeating unit ED stack. Fig. 7 indicates
the desalination performance of PFED with simulated sea water and

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

145

Fig. 6. Desalination performance of integrated ED and RED in a batch-wise mode. (a)
Conductivity of the desalinated water; (b) the voltage of ED. Other experimental
conditions: RED cell pair number is 20; ow rate in the other compartments are
135 mL/min; the volume of desalinated water is 250 mL . Note . The number in the
legend denotes the repeating unit of membrane in ED stack.

Fig. 7. Desalination performance of integrated ED and RED with simulated sea water and
wastewater in a batch-wise mode. (a) Conductivity of the desalinated water; (b) the
voltage of ED. Other experimental conditions: RED cell pair number is 20; ED repeat unit
number is 4; Flow rate in the other compartments are 135 mL/min; the volume of
desalinated water is 250 mL.

wastewater. The desalination performance was compared with the
above NaCl solution as the feed solution. As shown in Fig. 7a, the con-
ductivity curve of simulated sea water and wastewater is almost the
same as the NaCl solution. This is due to the same concentration rate be-
tween LC and HC of RED in both NaCl solution and simulated water. At
the same time, Fig. 7b shows the voltage in ED with NaCl solution is
even higher than that with simulated water. At the two cases, the con-
centration gradients can be considered to be identical, which allow
the same total voltage by RED. This total voltage will be distributed be-
tween the RED and ED units according the respective internal resis-
tance. Compared with pure NaCl solution, the simulated solution will
cause an increase in internal resistance of RED and thus voltage in ED
at this case is relatively decreased. Nevertheless, it is feasible to produce
fresh water by integrated ED and RED with sea water and wastewater.

4. Conclusion

~ 72 米S/cm conductivity was obtained in a batch-wise mode. Thirdly, the
combined process is also successfully carried out with simulated sea
water and wastewater. The highest power output for PFED occurs at
the case where internal resistances of RED and ED units are equal. In
conclusion, it is technically feasible, and economically attractive to pro-
duce fresh water from two concentration gradient water without the
consumption of external energy.

Acknowledgements

This project has been supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (No. 21490581), National High Technology Re-
search and Development Program 863 (No. 2015AA021001) and One
Hundred Person Project (2015-43-D) of the Chinese Academy of
Sciences.

A power free electrodialysis (PFED) was proposed with reverse elec-
trodialysis (RED) as an engine for electrodialysis (ED). Firstly, the RED
process was optimized from both the ow rate and concentration differ-
ence between LC and HC. The results indicated the NaCl concentrations
in LC and HC are 1 g/L and 30 g/L with the ow rate of 67.5 ml/min
(0.22 cm/s line ow velocity) were the optimum conditions for RED ex-
periment. Secondly, an in-situ integration of ED with RED was operated
at both a continuous mode and a batch-wise mode. Desalted water with

References

[1] W.H. Organization, Water Quality and Health Strategy 2013每2020, World Health
Organization, Geneva, Switzerland, 2013.
[2] M.M. Pendergast, E.M. Hoek, A review of water treatment membrane nanotechnol-
ogies, Energy Environ. Sci. 4 (2011) 1946每1971.
[3] M. Pasta, C.D. Wessells, Y. Cui, F. La Mantia, A desalination battery, Nano Lett. 12
(2012) 839每843.
[4] M. Elimelech, W.A. Phillip, The future of seawater desalination: energy, technology,
and the environment, Science 333 (2011) 712每717.

146

F. Luo et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 138每146

[5] M. Sadrzadeh, T. Mohammadi, Sea water desalination using electrodialysis, Desali-
nation 221 (2008) 440每447.
[6] K.Y. Wang, T.-S. Chung, M. Gryta, Hydrophobic PVDF hollow ber membranes with
narrow pore size distribution and ultra-thin skin for the fresh water production
through membrane distillation, Chem. Eng. Sci. 63 (2008) 2587每2594.
[7] A. Al-Karaghouli, L.L. Kazmerski, Energy consumption and water production cost of
conventional and renewable-energy-powered desalination processes, Renew. Sust.
Energ. Rev. 24 (2013) 343每356.
[8] C.X. Jiang, Y.M. Wang, Z.H. Zhang, T.W. Xu, Electrodialysis of concentrated brine
from RO plant to produce coarse salt and freshwater, J. Membr. Sci. 450 (2014)
323每330.
[9] T.W. Xu, C.H. Huang, Electrodialysis-based separation technologies: a critical review,
AICHE J. 54 (2008) 3147每3159.
[10] C.J. Vrsmarty, P. McIntyre, M.O. Gessner, D. Dudgeon, A. Prusevich, P. Green, S.
Glidden, S.E. Bunn, C.A. Sullivan, C.R. Liermann, Global threats to human water secu-
rity and river biodiversity, Nature 467 (2010) 555每561.
[11] P. Malek, J. Ortiz, H. Schulte-Herbr邦ggen, Decentralized desalination of brackish
water using an electrodialysis system directly powered by wind energy, Desalina-
tion 377 (2016) 54每64.
[12] A. El-Sebaii, E. El-Bialy, Advanced designs of solar desalination systems: a review,
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 49 (2015) 1198每1212.
[13] B.E. Logan, M. Elimelech, Membrane-based processes for sustainable power genera-
tion using water, Nature 488 (2012) 313每319.
[14] J.W. Post, H.V.M. Hamelers, C.J.N. Buisman, Energy recovery from controlled mixing
salt and fresh water with a reverse electrodialysis system, Environ. Sci. Technol. 42
(2008) 5785每5790.
[15] R.E. Lacey, Energy by reverse electrodialysis, Ocean Eng. 7 (1980) 1每47.
[16] R. Pattle, Production of Electric Power by Mixing Fresh and Salt Water in the Hydro-
electric Pile, 1954.
[17] E. Guler, Y.L. Zhang, M. Saakes, K. Nijmeijer, Tailor-made anion-exchange mem-
branes for salinity gradient power generation using reverse electrodialysis,
ChemSusChem 5 (2012) 2262每2270.
[18] M. Turek, B. Bandura, Renewable energy by reverse electrodialysis, Desalination 205
(2007) 67每74.
[19] J.G. Hong, B.P. Zhang, S. Glabman, N. Uzal, X.M. Dou, H.G. Zhang, X.Z. Wei, Y.S. Chen,
Potential ion exchange membranes and system performance in reverse electrodial-
ysis for power generation: a review, J. Membr. Sci. 486 (2015) 71每88.
[20] P. Dugocki, J. Dbrowska, K. Nijmeijer, M. Wessling, Ion conductive spacers for in-
creased power generation in reverse electrodialysis, J. Membr. Sci. 347 (2010)
101每107.

[21] Q. Chen, Y.-Y. Liu, C. Xue, Y.-L. Yang, W.-M. Zhang, Energy self-sufcient desalination
stack as a potential fresh water supply on small islands, Desalination 359 (2015)
52每58.
[22] R.A. Tufa, E. Curcio, E. Brauns, W. van Baak, E. Fontananova, G. Di Proo, Membrane
distillation and reverse electrodialysis for near-zero liquid discharge and low energy
seawater desalination, J. Membr. Sci. 496 (2015) 325每333.
[23] W. Li, W.B. Krantz, E.R. Cornelissen, J.W. Post, A.R. Verliefde, C.Y. Tang, A novel hy-
brid process of reverse electrodialysis and reverse osmosis for low energy seawater
desalination and brine management, Appl. Energy 104 (2013) 592每602.
[24] Y. Jande, W. Kim, Integrating reverse electrodialysis with constant current operating
capacitive deionization, J. Environ. Manag. 146 (2014) 463每469.
[25] P. Dugocki, K. Nymeijer, S. Metz, M. Wessling, Current status of ion exchange
membranes for power generation from salinity gradients, J. Membr. Sci. 319
(2008) 214每222.
[26] J.N. Weinstein, F.B. Leitz, Electric power from differences in salinity: the dialytic bat-
tery, Science 191 (1976) 557每559.
[27] I. Rubinstein, J. Pretz, E. Staude, Open circuit voltage in a reverse electrodialysis cell,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 3 (2001) 1666每1667.
[28] E. G邦ler, Anion Exchange Membrane Design for Reverse Electrodialysis, Universiteit
Twente, 2014.
[29] J. Veerman, M. Saakes, S.J. Metz, G.J. Harmsen, Reverse electrodialysis: performance
of a stack with 50 cells on the mixing of sea and river water, J. Membr. Sci. 327
(2009) 136每144.
[30] S. Pawlowski, P. Sistat, J.G. Crespo, S. Velizarov, Mass transfer in reverse electrodial-
ysis: ow entrance effects and diffusion boundary layer thickness, J. Membr. Sci. 471
(2014) 72每83.
[31] D.A. Vermaas, M. Saakes, K. Nijmeijer, Enhanced mixing in the diffusive boundary
layer for energy generation in reverse electrodialysis, J. Membr. Sci. 453 (2014)
312每319.
[32] J. Veerman, M. Saakes, S.J. Metz, G.J. Harmsen, Reverse electrodialysis: a validated
process model for design and optimization, Chem. Eng. J. 166 (2011) 256每268.
[33] M. Tedesco, E. Brauns, A. Cipollina, G. Micale, P. Modica, G. Russo, J. Helsen, Reverse
electrodialysis with saline waters and concentrated brines: a laboratory investiga-
tion towards technology scale-up, J. Membr. Sci. 492 (2015) 9每20.
[34] A. Daniilidis, D.A. Vermaas, R. Herber, K. Nijmeijer, Experimentally obtainable ener-
gy from mixing river water, seawater or brines with reverse electrodialysis, Renew.
Energy 64 (2014) 123每131.

