Atomic force microscopy study of the biofouling and mechanical properties of virgin and industrially fouled reverse osmosis membranes

L.C. Powell a, N. Hilal b, C.J. Wright a,

a Biomaterials, Biofouling and Biolms Engineering Laboratory (B3EL), The Systems and Process Engineering Centre (SPEC) College of Engineering, Swansea University, Fabian Way, Swansea, UK
b Centre for Water Advanced Technologies and Environmental Research (CWATER), College of Engineering, Swansea University, Fabian Way, Swansea SA1 8EN, UK

H I G H L I G H T S

 Atomic force microscopy (AFM) imaging of industrially fouled reverse osmosis membranes
 AFM force spectroscopy measured the Young's modulus of virgin and fouled membranes.
 pH inuenced the mechanical properties of virgin and fouled membranes.
 AFM force spectroscopy of membranes extended to measure energy of adhesion.
 Signicant difference in mechanical properties between fouled and virgin membranes

article

info


Article history:
Received 13 June 2016
Received in revised form 27 October 2016
Accepted 5 November 2016
Available online 23 November 2016

Keywords:
Membrane
Reverse osmosis
Biofouling
Biolm
Atomic force microscopy

abctract

The mechanical properties of virgin and industrially fouled reverse osmosis membranes (composite polyamide)
used for the purication and desalination of seawater in desalination processes were characterised using novel
atomic force microscopy (AFM) methods. Polymeric surface elasticity has previously been demonstrated to
strongly affect the adhesion of bacteria; hence the study examined membrane surface elasticity to demonstrate
how AFM can be used to assess the bio-fouling potential of membranes. An AFM colloid probe technique was
used to determine the mechanical properties of the membrane, the adhesion forces and the work of adhesion
at the membrane surfaces. The mean values of Young's modulus for the virgin membrane decreased in magni-
tude with increasing pH values, where these values were signicantly different (p b 0.017) between both pH 3
(1450 kPa), pH 7 (1327 kPa) and pH 9 (788 kPa). These differences were attributed to differences in membrane
swelling and indicate possible control parameters that could be exploited to improve membrane cleaning re-
gimes. A membrane with a higher modulus will be stronger and potentially more resistant to chemical and phys-
ical processes during operation and cleaning. Signicant differences (p b 0.017) in force measurements were also
found between different electrolytic conditions for each of the membranes, where for the virgin membrane the
adhesion force values were 6.00 nN at pH 3, 1.77 nN at pH 7 and 0.98 N at pH 9, and also the work of adhesion
were 153.6 nJ at pH 3, 22.8nJ at pH 7 and 9.9 nJ at pH 9 in 0.6 M NaCl. These observations further conrm the im-
portance of the electrolytic environment on the nanoscale interactions of the membrane which should be consid-
ered to control fouling during operation and cleaning cycles. AFM images and streaming potential measurements
of virgin and fouled membranes were also obtained to aid analysis of the industrial membrane system. The novel
application of AFM to membranes to measure Young's moduli and work of adhesion is a new addition to the AFM
tools that can be used to unravel separation processes at the membrane surface. In addition, this study further
demonstrates that AFM force spectroscopy can be used as part of a sophisticated membrane autopsy procedure
for the elucidation of the mechanisms involved in membrane fouling.

 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Membrane separation is now an established technology that has
been applied for the production of ultra-pure water by the purication
and desalination of seawater using reverse osmosis (RO) membranes.
However, membrane ltration processes are commonly impeded by
membrane fouling, which leads to considerable technical problems,
such as reduction in water product quality and requirement for higher
pressure. The life span of the membrane is also shortened by fouling
and the subsequent need for cleaning processes [1,2]. A major contrib-
uting factor to membrane fouling within industry is the formation of
microbial biolms at the surface of the membrane [3,4]. Desalination
plants can use a number of strategies for the prevention and control of
membrane fouling, which include the use of pre-treatment units for
the removal of organic and inorganic dissolved substances and the
cleaning of the membrane by either back-washing or chemical wash
[5]. To augment these strategies many studies have focussed on the
membrane fabrication stage to reduce fouling and optimise the mem-
brane processes [6,7]. Thus, a greater understanding of the physical,
chemical and biological processes regulating biolm formation and de-
velopment is required to aid in developing new strategies to inhibit or
control the biolm membrane fouling.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) has become an essential tool for the
membrane technologist optimising separation processes through greater
understanding of fouling mechanisms [8每10]. This versatile instrument
not only produces high resolution images of the membrane surface in
process relevant environments but can also be used to quantify the forces
acting at a membrane surface which govern fouling processes. Force is
measured as a function of distance when a probe attached to the apex
of the AFM cantilever, approaches the sample, makes contact and then re-
tracts away from the sample. The displacement is varied using the exten-
sion and retraction of a piezoelectric crystal. The deection of the
cantilever is monitored and converted into values of force using Hooke's
Law, calibration of the spring constant and deection sensitivity [11].
Force measurement data presented in the form of a force-distance
curve, as shown in Fig. 1, can provide valuable information on interactions
forces and local material properties such as elasticity, hardness, adhesion
and surface charge densities. Fig. 1 presents typical AFM measurements
made at virgin and fouled membranes within an aqueous environment.
The local mechanical properties of a membrane or fouling layer indicate
the resilience of the material to chemical and physical processes. For poly-
mer membranes a harder surface may have reduced wear compared to
softer membranes during operation and cleaning cycles [12]. A foulant
layer which has low mechanical robustness will be more susceptible to
hydrodynamic shear applied during cleaning procedures. The mechanical
properties of a membrane or a thin lm can be studied by measuring
force-distance curves obtained by AFM and then analysing force data
through a chosen mechanical theory which considers the contact and in-
dentation of two surfaces to obtain a value of Young's modulus. AFM im-
aging can be used to identify changes in nanoscale morphology and
surface roughness when a foulant layer forms on a membrane surfaces.
AFM force-distance curves can be used to measure changes in the me-
chanical properties at the membrane surface when the membrane-foul-
ing layer system forms.
AFM imaging has been used to study the surface roughness and pore
size distribution of many types of membrane, the distribution of fouling
materials at a membrane surface before and after cleaning processes
[13,14] and also to study the early bacterial colonisation events that
lead to biolm formation at nanoltration membranes [15]. The AFM
force-measurement capability has been used to study interactions that
govern separation processes including particle/bubble interactions
[16] and particle/membrane interactions to provide an assessment of
the fouling potential of membranes [17,18]. The bulk mechanical prop-
erties of membranes, such as polybenzimidazole (PBI), have been inves-
tigated for the determination of tensile strength, storage modulus and
Young's modulus, using techniques such as dynamic mechanical analy-
sis (DMA) [19,20]. However, the local mechanical properties of the poly-
mer, at the membrane surface, vary from the bulk of the polymer, and it
is the local properties that act at the commensurate size of microbes
which will inuence the microbial attachment. The AFM nano-indenta-
tion technique allows for a simple, convenient measurement of local
Young's modulus of membranes. Franceschini and Corti [21] deter-
mined the elastic moduli of naon, PBI and poly [2,5-benzimidazole]
membranes, both undoped and phosphoric acid doped, using AFM
force spectroscopy. AFM nano-indentation has also been used to mea-
sure the Young's modulus and hardness of various polymers, such as
polyethylene, polyvinyl alcohol, polyvinyl chloride, polycarbonate,

Fig. 1. Force-distance measurement curves: (a) Annotated AFM force curve typically
measured over 1 米m, (b) typical AFM force curve measured within liquid at a virgin
membrane and (c) typical AFM force curve measured within liquid at a fouled membrane.

Nylon6, poly(methyl methacrylate), polystyrene and polyacrylic acid
[22,23]. However, there is a limited literature on the membrane elastic-
ity of commercially available membranes, and it is only recently that
Chung et al. [24] reported the rst measurement of the Young's modu-
lus of the active layer of RO membrane using a combined wrinkling-
cracking methodology.

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

315

Many studies that have used AFM to characterise virgin and fouled
membrane surfaces have only measured adhesive forces and have
been limited as they have used small numbers of AFM force-distance
measurements to characterise the surfaces. Recent developments in
AFM technology and its associated data capture now permit the mea-
surement of multiple force measurements across a surface and the cre-
ation of force measurement distributions. This has enabled statistical
analysis and improved comparison between different surface systems
including fouled membranes [13,25].
AFM has been used extensively for the study of bacteria but only a
few researchers have used this technique to study biolms [26,27].
AFM imaging has provided high resolution images of the bacterial cell
surface and AFM force measurement has been used to quantify bacterial
cell-surface adhesion. The AFM nanoindentation technique allows the
measurement of substrate elasticity and is being used to unravel the fun-
damental processes involved in the attachment of cells and bacteria to
elastic surfaces. Recently substrate elasticity has emerged as an impor-
tant physical factor in the response of many cell types to surfaces.
Some research groups consider that the elasticity of a substrate will
have an effect on the cell rigidity; therefore the stiffness of a substrate
is intrinsic to the cells response of attachment and growth [28每30]. A
few studies were performed on the mechanical properties of bacterial
cells grown on soft elastic surfaces. Bakker et al. [28] investigated the de-
position of three marine strains, Halomonas pacica, Marinobacter
hydrocarbonoclasticus and Psychrobacter sp. onto polyurethane coated
glass with varying elastic modulus in a stagnation point ow chamber.
It was shown that the bacteria adhered in higher numbers to hard sur-
faces compared to that at surface coatings of lower elastic moduli. Lichter
et al. [30], engineered weak polyelectrolyte multilayered (PEM) thin
lms within the elasticity range 1 MPa b E b 100 MPa to investigate if sur-
face elasticity affects bacterial adhesion. The adhesion of viable Staphylo-
coccus epidermidis and Eschericia coli was found to correlate positively
with increasing elastic modulus of PEM, independently of surface rough-
ness, surface interaction energy and surface charge density of the surface.
These studies demonstrate that the stiffness of nanoscale polymeric sub-
strata can strongly affect the adhesion of bacteria from aqueous suspen-
sions and that the measurement of local mechanical properties of a
substrate and bacterial cells are required for the understanding of cell re-
sponses on surfaces [29]. Oh et al. [31] have also observed that the forma-
tion of a bio-fouling layer (biolm) is strongly dependent on the
mechanical characteristics of the solid substrate. Therefore, membrane
elasticity is a key factor in bacterial cell attachment and hence biolm
formation, where force measurements could provide an assessment of
membrane bio-fouling potential within process environments. There-
fore, in the present study a comprehensive AFM force measurement in-
vestigation was performed on both virgin and industrially fouled
commercial RO membrane surfaces; the membrane samples were re-
moved from a desalination plant, for pre-treated seawater, that was
experiencing fouling. This was to determine the micromechanical prop-
erties of the systems as indicators of their propensity for biofouling and
also for the development of fouling control regimes for optimisation of
membrane processes and water treatment. This was achieved through
obtaining Young's modulus values, adhesion force and work of adhesion
at different pH values and in media containing the salt content of seawa-
ter. Surface charge measurements were also performed on the mem-
branes surfaces to further examine the processes of adhesion. It is the
rst time, to the author's knowledge, that AFM nanoindentation experi-
ments have been performed on RO membranes and on industrially
fouled membranes for the measurement of elasticity properties.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Membrane preparation

The membrane element, SWC3 +, used was obtained from Hydra-
nautics (Nitto Denko Company). The membrane polymer is composite

polyamide and has a nominal salt rejection of 99.8%. An industrially fouled
section of the membrane element, SWC3+, was obtained from the Fujai-
rah Water and Power plant, located in the United Arab Emirates (UAE).
The fouling was known to be bacterial in origin; a culture independent
method based on the 16S rDNA sequence and constructed gene libraries
for the identication of the microbial diversity was used to identify the
most signicant bacteria responsible for biolm formation and biofouling
at the industrial RO membrane system of the present study [3].
Proteobacteria was determined to be the most abundant identied
group, with 污-Proteobacteria being the most predominant class within
the phylum. The next most abundant grouping was the Bacterioidetes
and Plantomycetes. The fouled membrane section was stored at  20 ∼C
until used. Storage may impact on the structure of the foulant layer, this
is a problem that is innate to all such studies which remove bio-fouled
samples from a process environment to facilitate membrane study. How-
ever, in this case the thin foulant lm may be protected by the underlying
substrate membrane. Prior to AFM analysis, the virgin and industrially
fouled membrane samples were soaked in deionised water at 4 ∼C for
24 h, taking care not to disrupt the foulant layer present on the industri-
ally fouled membrane. In preparation for imaging after 24 h of initial
soaking, the virgin and industrially fouled membrane samples were left
to dry then cut into small sections of 15 mm2 within a sterile environment
and attached to one side of a glass cover slip using double sided adhesive
tape.
In preparation for AFM force measurements, the virgin and industri-
ally fouled membrane samples were cut into small sections within a
sterile environment and attached to one side of a 25 mm2 circular
glass cover slip using double sided adhesive tape. A circular 25 mm2
plastic uid cell was then placed over the cover slip and secured in
place with silica gel. 3 ml of the liquid of varying pH and salt concentra-
tion was placed carefully into the uid cell and left for 20 min for the
system to stabilise.
In preparation for streaming potential measurements, the virgin and
industrially fouled membrane samples were cut using provided tem-
plates (Anton Paar) into two rectangular shaped pieces with specic
holes for liquid ow, which would t the rectangular uid cell of the
instrument.

2.2. Membrane AFM images

A Dimension 3100 AFM (Bruker) was used for membrane imaging.
Noncontact cantilevers were used for imaging (OTESPA, Bruker). The
membrane images were achieved using tapping mode within an air en-
vironment of 21 ∼C and a relative humidity of 40%. Tapping mode AFM
has been used extensively to image membranes and microbial surfaces
[8,9,11]. Tapping mode in air was used and not imaging in liquid, the lat-
ter is experimentally demanding and risks imaging artefacts by damag-
ing diffuse foulant layers if present. A scan rate of 0.4 Hz was used for
most images, however for the largest scan size of 100 米m ℅ 100 米m, a
scan rate of 0.2 Hz was used to achieve a higher quality image. The im-
ages were analysed through the AFM Nanoscope software to obtain
peak to valley and surface roughness measurements for both the virgin
and fouled membranes at each scan size.

2.3. Force spectrometry measurement of local elastic properties

The NanoWizard II BioAFM with top view optics (JPK Instruments)
was used for the force measurements on all membrane surfaces. AFM
colloid probes were made using a micromanipulator (Singer Instru-
ments). In this technique a silica sphere of 3 米m radius was attached
to the apex of a tipless cantilever using glass bond glue. Only AFM col-
loid probes of radius 3 米m were used in experimentation to standardise
the contact area between the probe and the surface. The colloid probe's
cantilever spring constant was measured via the thermal tune method.
The silica colloid probe was chosen for indentation studies of the mem-
branes due to its well dened shape and larger tip radius when

316

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

compared to manufactured silicon nitride sharp tips [32]. This means
that on a soft surface, the silica colloid probe will more likely compress
the surface, unlike sharp tips which could puncture and disrupt the sur-
face as sharp tips induce local strains that can far exceed the linear ma-
terial regime. 50 force curves were measured across the membrane
surfaces at randomly chosen locations in each experimental system.

2.4. Streaming potential of the membranes

The Electro Kinetic Analyzer (Anton Paar) was used to determine the
streaming potential of virgin and industrial fouled membranes at 0.1 M
NaCl concentration and pH values 3每9. The cut membrane sample
pieces were clamped between two measuring cell parts separated by a
dened streaming channel within the rectangular uid cell. Once the
preliminary rinse cycles were performed, the pH of the salt solution
was adjusted and the zeta potential measurements were repeated
three times for each pH value in each direction of uid ow. Zeta poten-
tial of the membrane surfaces was calculated from the measured
streaming potential using the Helmholtz-Smoluchowski equation with
the Fairbrother-Mastin approach.

3. Data analysis

The AFM force data was analysed to determine values of maximum
adhesion force, work of adhesion and the Hertz model was used to cal-
culate Young's Modulus values. The value of force is calculated from the
deection of the cantilever using Hooke's law. The force as a function of
the piezo scanner displacement is sufcient to calculate the parameters
and no further manipulation of the piezo scanner displacement data is
required. The contact region of the approach curve is compared to that
measured at a hard un-deformable surface to calculate the indentation
depth (h) when a force (F) was applied [27]. The value of adhesion is de-
termined from the minimum point of the retraction curve. The contact
point was dened as the height where the cantilever deection begins
to leave the horizontal axis on the deection vs. sample height curve
[33]. The work of adhesion was determined from the area between
the retraction curve and the x axis (Fig. 1) applying the trapezoidal
rule to integrate.
The equation widely used to calculate the force on the cantilever
F(h) by using Hertz mechanisms is [11]:

p

F h   4 R
3


E

h3 =

2

The tip is approximated by a sphere with the radius R. E is known as
the effective modulus of a system tip-sample. The material of the tip is
considerably harder than the sample, thus the following equation was
used:

E  ＞ Esample
sample

1耒2

where Esample and 耒sample are the denotations for the Young's Modulus
and the Poisson ratio for the materials of the sample, respectively.
Through the substitution of the above equations into the Hertz equation
and analysis of the data from the force-distance curves, the Young's
Modulus of the sample was determined.

Young's modulus between virgin and fouled membranes. Due to multi-
ple testing, a Bonferroni correction was applied for each analysis.

4. Results and discussion

4.1. High resolution images

Atomic force microscopy imaging elucidated the morphology of the
fouling layers at the industrial fouled RO membranes. Fig. 2 presents
high resolution 10 ℅ 10 米m and 100 ℅ 100 米m AFM topographical im-
ages of virgin and process fouled SWC 3 + RO membranes. The virgin
membrane images clearly show the structure of the RO membrane sur-
face, where the structural surface of the membrane is composed from
peaks and valleys. A similar RO surface topography was observed in an
AFM and SEM study by Kwak and Ihm [34]. The fouled membrane im-
ages clearly show the relatively non-uniform distribution of fouling
present on the RO surface, where the structure of the RO membrane
can be seen in gaps within the fouling layer (Fig. 2B). The high resolu-
tion images of the fouled membranes suggested the presence of a bacte-
rial biolm, with the presence of particles of commensurate size of
bacteria embedded in a loose lm like structure. The presence of the
bacterial biolm was further supported by previous work that used
standard DNA techniques to identify the key bacterial species involved
in the industrial fouling of the membrane of this study [3]. AFM technol-
ogy has previously been utilized for the low resolution imaging of
foulant layers formed on process membranes [35,36].
The surface roughness and peak to valley measurements are shown
in Table 1, where the root mean square (RMS) surface roughness of the
virgin RO membrane was 174 ㊣ 26 nm and the peak to valley measure-
ment of 1975 ㊣ 757 nm and the RMS surface roughness of the fouled
membrane was 297 ㊣ 44 nm and peak to valley measurement of
3837 ㊣ 1013 nm measured from the 100 ℅ 100 米m images. The results
also show that as the scan size increases from 1 to 100 米m2, the values of
surface roughness and peak to valley increase for both the virgin and
fouled membranes. The current results agree with the work of Boussu
et al. [37] which found that surface roughness increases with scan
area from 0.5 米m2 to 10 米m2 with different NF membranes, where an ex-
planation is that when the scan size is changed, it is possible to get a dif-
ferent surface topography, therefore resulting in a different roughness
value [37]. From Table 1, it can also be seen that the fouled membrane
surface has the largest surface roughness and peak to valley measure-
ments for all scan sizes when compared to the virgin membrane, apart
from the surface roughness values measured from the 10 ℅ 10 米m
image, where the fouled membrane surface is smoother than the virgin
membrane. The smoother surface could be due to the presence of a co-
hesive fouling layer, which may have been facilitated by bacterial foul-
ing producing extracellular polymeric substance (EPS) within the
foulant layer. Previous research has found that surface roughness mea-
surements of similar, virgin RO membranes were 66 nm [38] (from
4 ℅ 4 米m) and 50 nm [34] (from 10 ℅ 10 米m) and the corresponding
peak to valley measurements were 560 nm [38] and 400 nm [34]. The
range of these values conrm with current ndings of surface roughness
and peak-to-valley measurements of virgin RO membranes at small
scan sizes (Table 1). The topography, surface roughness and peak to val-
ley measurements show that the virgin RO membranes could be suscep-
tible to biofouling, as the rough surface topography, with valleys of size
commensurate with that of bacteria, could facilitate attachment of bac-
terial cells and shield the attached bacteria from the shear ow.

3.1. Statistical analysis

4.2. Young's modulus measurement by force spectrometry analysis

All data are expressed as mean ㊣ standard deviation. The statistical
analysis was performed using MiniTab Software, where normal distri-
bution of variables was assessed using the Krustill Wallis test. The
non-parametric Mann-Whitney U test for independent samples was
used to compare mean values of adhesion force, work of adhesion and

The mean Young's modulus values were determined from force
measurements achieved at virgin and fouled membranes in 0.6 M
NaCl at pH values of 3, 7 and 9 (Table 2). The distribution of Young's
modulus values from the virgin membrane and fouled membranes are
summarized using boxplots shown in Fig. 3, where the distribution of

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

317

A.

C.

B.

D.

Fig. 2. Tapping mode AFM topographic images of virgin and fouled SWC 3+ RO membrane. A and C images show the topography of virgin SWC 3+ membrane at 10 米m ℅ 10 米m and
100 米m ℅ 100 米m, respectively, while B and D images show the topography of fouled SWC 3+ membrane at 10 米m ℅ 10 米m and 100 米m ℅ 100 米m respectively. The arrow in image B
is suggested to be a cluster of bacterial cells. Z range in all images is 2.0 米m.

all variables were non-parametric. The mean values of Young's modulus
for the virgin membrane decreased in magnitude with increasing pH
values, where these values were signicantly different (p b 0.017) be-
tween pH 3 (1.45 MPa) and pH 9 (0.79 MPa) and pH 7 (1.33 MPa)
and pH 9. The change in Young's modulus values with pH could be
due to polymer expansion. Elliott et al. [39] has shown that expansion
of the ionic polymer lm was related to the solution pH. Yang et al.
[40] also demonstrated that the ionization of functional groups through
pH change plays a key role in the expansion of the membrane, where for
certain membranes the higher the pH above the IEP in terms of zeta po-
tential can lead to favourable polar interactions with the surrounding
solution so that the foulant compounds are more extended. The IEP of
the polyamide membrane in this study is at low pH (Section 4.5).
Thus, the higher Young＊ Modulus at lower pH coincides with a mem-
brane that has a denser polymeric structure. These results indicate
that the electrolytic environment is a potential control parameter that
could be exploited to improve the mechanical robustness of a polymer
membrane, where at pH 3 the surface is at its most robust with the
highest Young's modulus measured for all electrolytic environments

tested (1.45 MPa). These results could provide the membrane technol-
ogist with a method to improve the maintenance of membrane struc-
ture during the chemical and physical challenges of operation and
cleaning.
The mean values of Young's modulus for the fouled membrane in-
creased from pH 3 to pH 7 and then decreased in magnitude from
pH 7 to pH 9, where these values were only signicantly different
(p b 0.017) from pH 7 (93.8 kPa) to pH 9 (48.0 kPa). The mechanical
properties of the fouling layer present on RO membrane surface will af-
fect the shape and stability of the layer and therefore can determine the
failure and detachment of the fouling layer in reaction to a physical force
such as uid-induced shear and also the accumulation of such fouling
layers in industrial environments [41]. The dependence of the mem-
brane foulant layer Young's modulus on pH could be due to the nature
of the different foulant materials within the biolm and their difference
response to the environmental conditions. Therefore the elasticity of the
foulant surface present on the membrane surface could vary with indus-
trial conditions. This suggests that optimum electrolytic conditions
could be determined where the elasticity of the foulant layer is at its

Table 1
Surface roughness measurements from the virgin and process fouled membrane.

Membrane size (米m)

1 ℅ 1
10 ℅ 10
100 ℅ 100

RMS (nm)

Virgin

69.7 ㊣ 13.7
107.9 ㊣ 9.68
173.7 ㊣ 25.9

Process fouled

87.5 ㊣ 11.2
99.6 ㊣ 14.3
297.7 ㊣ 44.2

Peak to valley (nm)

Virgin

444.3 ㊣ 112.1
786.0 ㊣ 116.6
1974.7 ㊣ 756.8

Process fouled

490.2 ㊣ 109.6
824.3 ㊣ 112.5
3837.0 ㊣ 1013.3

318

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

Table 2
Mean values of Young's modulus, adhesion force and work of adhesion achieved from both virgin and fouled membranes at various pH values.

Mean Young's modulus (kPa)

Mean adhesion force (nN)

Mean work of adhesion (nJ)

pH 3
pH 7
pH 9

Virgin

1450 ㊣ 986
1327 ㊣ 947
788 ㊣ 432

Fouled

70.9 ㊣ 36.3
93.8 ㊣ 55.1
48.1 ㊣ 26.4

Virgin

6.00 ㊣ 4.02
1.77 ㊣ 1.14
0.98 ㊣ 0.72

Fouled

0.73 ㊣ 0.90
0.85 ㊣ 0.96
0.84 ㊣ 0.85

Virgin

153.6 ㊣ 89.8
22.8 ㊣ 28.6
9.9 ㊣ 10.2

Fouled

16.2 ㊣ 48.4
13.4 ㊣ 23.9
12.9 ㊣ 21.9

lowest, rendering cleaning regimes, such as cross-ow, more effective
in removing and breaking up the foulant biolm.
The comparison between the values of Young's modulus achieved
from the virgin and fouled membrane at each pH value showed that
all the values of Young's modulus of the virgin were signicantly differ-
ent from the Young's modulus of the fouled membrane (p b 0.017),
where the values of Young's modulus were greater in magnitude for
the virgin membrane (1450 kPa at pH 3) than that for the fouled mem-
brane (70.9 kPa at pH 3). The measurement of Young's modulus can be
used to compare the fouling within different process conditions for op-
timisation, in that lowering the mechanical robustness of the fouling
layer and/or raising that of the membrane surface will enable the
cleaning regime to be more effective.
Franceschini and Corti [21] performed AFM force measurements to
determine the elastic moduli of nonhydrated naon, PBI and poly [2,5-
benzimidazole] membranes, using a sharp contact tip in a N2 environ-
ment, where the elasticity values measured for the different mem-
branes ranged from 0.104 ㊣ 0.036 to 6.17 ㊣ 0.93 GPa. Chung et al.
[24] reported the rst measure of Young's modulus of the active layer
of RO membrane, both in a dry (1.40 ㊣ 0.53 GPa) and hydrated state
(0.36 ㊣ 0.14 GPa), using a combined wrinkling-cracking methodology.
The difference between these values and those measured in this study
are due to the environment in which the measurements were taken
and the level of membrane hydration. The indentation experiments in
the present study are performed in a liquid environment, as would be
in the industrial process, and a colloid probe was used which could
also account for this difference in elasticity values; measurements
made using a sharp AFM tip will be based on material rupture during
layer penetration rather than compression by the colloid sphere. In ad-
dition, the studies performed here are industrially relevant with ionic
concentrations which would be present within the desalination process,
unlike other studies.

4.3. Adhesion force

The mean adhesion force values were determined from force mea-
surements achieved at virgin and fouled membranes in 0.6 M NaCl at
pH 3, 7 and 9, where the data is shown in Table 2. NaCl was chosen
for the electrolytic media to keep the experimental environment simple,

however the lack of divalent and trivalent ions, which can inuence col-
loidal interaction, may limit extension of the results to seawater. The
distribution of adhesion force values from virgin and fouled membranes
are summarized using boxplots shown in Fig. 4, where the distribution
of all variables were non-parametric. The mean values of adhesion force
for the virgin membrane revealed a high adhesion force of 6.0 nN at
pH 3, where the values of adhesion force decreased with increasing
pH, as measurements of 1.8 nN at pH 7 and 1.0 nN at pH 9 were obtain-
ed. The mean adhesion force values were signicantly different
(p b 0.017) between all pH values. The differences in adhesion force
values could be due to the charge held by the membrane surface in var-
ious electrolytic environments (see Section 4.5). The material that will
foul a reverse osmosis membrane will be highly heterogeneous contain-
ing materials that are biological in origin including humic acids (a natu-
rally occurring breakdown product of organic matter) and biolm
materials such as xanthan, hyaluronan and dextran. Thus, there will
be a range of interactions occurring between fouling material, mem-
brane and the silica probe, including electrostatic, van der Waals and
hydrophobic. The amount of information that can be inferred from the
measurement of adhesion of an inorganic silica particle at a membrane
surface is limited as reverse osmosis membrane fouling is a multi-com-
ponent process, however the interaction of the colloid probe can be
used as an indicator of the degree of particle interaction with that sur-
face. This will be more relevant to the surface interaction with inorganic
particles rather than biological particles where specic macromolecular
interactions may dominate. It should be noted that many bacteria have a
negative charge similar to that of a silica colloid. Thus, the signicant dif-
ferences (p b 0.017) in adhesion at the virgin membrane surface as the
pH is changed demonstrates that some fouling could be reduced at this
membrane surface by controlling the pH. However, this should be con-
sidered with reference to pH tolerance of the membrane material and
how the electrolytic environment affects the mechanical properties of
the membrane (as discussed in Section 4.2) as previous research has ob-
served the bacteria adhere to harder surfaces [28].
The average values of adhesion force for the fouled membrane
showed very little variation between the different pH values, where
the adhesion force value at pH 3 was 0.7 nN. The mean values were
not signicantly different (p N 0.017) between all pH values, so it was
concluded that pH did not have a measurable inuence on the values

(a)

)

a

P
k

(

s

l

u
u
d
o

m

s

'

g
n
u
o

Y

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH 9

(b)

)

a

P
k

(

s

u

l

u
d
o

m

s

'

g
n
u
o

Y

250

200

150

100

50

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH 9

Fig. 3. Variation of Young's modulus of (a) virgin and (b) fouled membranes between different pH values shown in boxblot forms.

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

319

(a)

)

N

n

(

e
c
r
o

F
n
o

i

s
e

h
d

A

20

15

10

5

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH 9

(b)

)

N

n

(

e
c
r
o

F
n
o

i

s
e

h
d

A

4

3

2

1

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH9

Fig. 4. Variation of adhesion force of (a) virgin and (b) fouled membranes between different pH values shown in boxplot forms.

of adhesion force. This was expected, the chemical heterogeneity of the
fouling material will mean that different chemical groups will be ionised
to different degrees within the different pH environments, thus there
will be no net change in the interactivity of the fouling lm. The extent
of electrostatic interactions will be reduced within the high ionic
strength environment of the present research, thus another explanation
for the consistency of adhesive force measured at the different pHs
could be the dominance of hydrophobicity on the interaction of the col-
loid probe and the fouled surface.
The comparison between the values of adhesion force achieved from
the virgin and fouled membrane at each pH value revealed that the
values of adhesion force of the virgin membrane at pH 3 (6.0 nN) and
pH 7 (1.8 nN) were signicantly different from the adhesion measured
at the fouled membrane at pH 3 (0.7 nN) and 7 (0.9 nN) (p b 0.017),
apart from the adhesion force values at pH 9 which were not signicant-
ly different (p N 0.017). The values of adhesion force achieved from the
virgin membrane at pH values of 3 and 7 were greater in magnitude
than that obtained for the fouled membrane. The differences in adhe-
sion forces observed between the fouled and virgin membrane indicate
that the surfaces are chemically different and conrm that the presence
of a fouling layer will alter the nanoscale interactions of the membrane
surface with potential compromise of the separation process.
Previous adhesion force measurement studies were performed by
Bowen and Doneva [38] on a virgin RO membrane using silica colloid
probes with a maximum loading force of 120 nN每140 nN, where force
measurements were performed in 101 M and at pH 9. The force mea-
surements performed on peaks of the membrane revealed an adhesion
of 2.3 ㊣ 0.48 mN/m and those performed within the membrane valleys,
the adhesion was 8.7 ㊣ 4.0 mN/m. The results obtained at 0.6 M NaCl at
pH 9 in the present study revealed adhesion force values of 0.98 nN,
which when normalized for colloid radius of 3 米m the adhesion value
is 0.33 mN/m, where the differences between the adhesion forces mea-
sured by the studies could be due to the very high loading force used by
Bowen and Doneva [38]. The colloid would have indented the sample to
a greater extent than the present study, hence more surface area contact
would have occurred between the sample and the colloid. In addition,
the measurements in the present study were at random positions across
the membrane surface, with no separation of measurements from peaks
and valleys.

4.4. Work of adhesion

The measurement of adhesion from the retraction force curve mini-
ma does not account for the mechanisms involved in adhesion (Fig. 1). It
is the shape of the force curve adhesion component, which can be de-
scribed by the work of adhesion, that provides information on interac-
tion mechanisms such as ligand-receptor peeling. The work of
adhesion is the work which must be done to separate two adjacent

phases, liquid-liquid or liquid-solid phase as in the case here. The
mean work of adhesion values were determined from force measure-
ments at virgin and fouled membranes in 0.6 M NaCl at pH 3, 7 and 9,
where the data is shown in Table 2. The distribution of work of adhesion
values from the virgin and fouled membranes were summarized using
boxplots shown in Fig. 5, where the distribution of all variables were
non-parametric. The average values of work of adhesion from the virgin
membrane revealed a high adhesion energy at pH 3 (153.6 nJ), which
decreased in magnitude at pH 7 (22.8 nJ) and then again at pH 9
(9.9 nJ). The mean work of adhesion values were signicantly different
(p b 0.017) between all pH values. The differences in work of adhesion
values could be due to the charge held by the membrane surface in var-
ious electrolytic environments (see Section 4.5). The average values of
work of adhesion for the fouled membrane showed very little variation
between the different pH values, for example at pH 3 the work of adhe-
sion was 16.2 nJ. The mean values were not signicantly difference
(p b 0.017), so it was concluded that pH did not have a measurable in-
uence on the values of work of adhesion obtained from the fouled
membrane.
The comparison between the values of work of adhesion achieved
from the virgin and fouled membrane at each pH value showed that
the values of work of adhesion of the virgin membrane at pH 3 and 7
were signicantly different and greater in magnitude from that for the
fouled membrane (p b 0.017). The work of adhesion values at pH 9
were not signicantly different (p N 0.017).
The work of adhesion and the adhesive force determined from a
force measurement are closely linked. However, the adhesive force
gives no indication as to how the AFM probe attaches and detaches
from a surface. This can be dramatically different when the minimum
force recorded in force curves, the adhesive force, is the same. If defor-
mation occurs when the AFM probe interacts with the surface, during
the approach and retraction phases of the force measurement, then
the work of adhesion will be greater. In addition, another contribution
to an increase in the work of adhesion could be an increase in the re-
cruitment of ligands to the interactions, so that the probe has to peel
away from the surface and break more bonds. In the present study the
high work of adhesion measured at the virgin membrane at pH 3
could be due to the deformation of the surface and/or the increased
number of bonds involved in the interaction. This argument demon-
strates the potential that AFM force measurement offers the membrane
technologist to unravel the processes operating during the formation of
fouling layers. In the past this has been restricted by using only AFM ad-
hesive force measurements.

4.5. Streaming potential

The results of zeta potential versus pH for the virgin and process
fouled RO membrane at 0.1 M NaCl concentrations are shown in Fig. 6.

320

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

(a)

)

J
n

(

n
o

i

s
e

h
d

A

f

o
k

r
o

W

400

300

200

100

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH 9

(b)

)

J
n

(

n
o

i

s
e

h
d

A

f

o
k

r
o

W

50

40

30

20

10

0

pH 3

pH 7

pH 9

Fig. 5. Variation of work of adhesion for (a) virgin and (b) fouled membranes between different pH values shown in boxplot forms.

The streaming potential equipment was only designed to be operated at
low salt concentrations therefore a maximum salt concentration of
0.1 M was used to provide an indication of the surface charge of the
membrane. The virgin membrane was positively charged or had no
charge at low pH (pH 4, 0 ㊣ 2 mV) and negatively charged at high pH
(pH 9,  5.8 ㊣ 3.5 mV), where the IEP was determined to be pH 4.0
for 0.1 M NaCl. The fouled membrane was entirely negatively charged
over the pH range, where at pH 3 the zeta potential was  2.3 ㊣
1.7 mV and at pH 9 was  11.3 ㊣ 3.5 mV and therefore no IEP could
be determined.
This differences in AFM force measurements obtained using AFM as
a function of pH could be attributed to the change in the ionization state
of the membrane surface. The present study measured greatest adhe-
sion and work of adhesion at pH 3, 6.0 nN and153.6 nJ respectively at
0.6 M NaCl, however there is a suggested agreement with the streaming
potential study that indicated that a positive or neutral charge was mea-
sured at lower pH. Thus, at pH 3 the membrane would be exhibiting a
charge that would not tend to repel the AFM colloid probe and so adhe-
sion parameters would be at their highest. At low pH, the surface charge
of the membrane may be positively charged at 0.6 M NaCl and close to
the IEP of the membrane where the electric double layer is relatively
thin, as shown in Fig. 6 for the virgin membrane at 0.1 M NaCl [42]. As
the pH is increased, the membrane may become negatively charged,
where the silica colloid is also negatively charged at high pH values
[42,43] so as the colloid approaches the membrane surface in these con-
ditions, the colloid could experience increasing electrostatic double-
layer repulsive force which opposes the motion of the colloid. Due to
the repulsive force, the particle may be prevented from coming into in-
timate contact with the membrane surface, which leads to a lower ad-
hesion force and work of adhesion.
For the fouled membrane, the adhesion force and work of adhesion
values revealed no signicant differences as a function of pH. The reason
could be the surface charge of the membrane being negative over all pH

)

V
m

(

l

a

i
t

n
e

t

o
P

a

t

e

Z

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25

Clean

fouled

3

4

5

7

8

9

6

pH

Fig. 6. Zeta potential measurements of virgin and fouled RO membrane at 0.1 M NaCl.

values (Fig. 6) which means that the colloid experiences a repulsive
force over all pH values which could explain why there was no signi-
cant difference of adhesion force and work of adhesion between pH
values [44].
Previous research by Al-Amoudi et al. [45] investigated the zeta po-
tential of three virgin and one fouled NF membrane at different pH
values and the results agree with our current ndings for RO mem-
branes, as the study concluded that the fouled DK (GE Osmonics) mem-
brane were almost negatively charged with no IEP over a range of pH
values when compared to a virgin DK membrane.

5. Conclusions

Mechanical measurements obtained from AFM force-distance mea-
surements can provide an assessment of the fouling potential of the
membranes by the elucidation of mechanical factors that affect mem-
brane fouling, which has the potential to reduce commissioning studies
and optimise process operation. In this study a novel and comprehen-
sive AFM characterisation of the mechanical properties of virgin and in-
dustrially fouled membranes was achieved, which detected differences
between the virgin and fouled membranes in different electrolyte con-
ditions. The results of the paper suggest that pH control could be inves-
tigated to strengthen membranes against chemical and physical
challenges, where the increased Young's modulus measured at pH 3 of
the virgin membrane indicate, for example, that cleaning at a low pH
may be advantageous for the protection of the membrane. A careful bal-
ance could be considered by the membrane technologist, which during
a cleaning process uses an electrolytic environment that renders the
membrane at its strongest, while the biofouling layer could be at its
weakest, with the caveat that disruption of the chemical properties of
the membrane material are kept to a minimum.
Recent studies have indicated that the mechanical properties of nano-
scale polymeric substrata can strongly inuence the adhesion of bacteria
in aqueous suspensions [30]. However, there are limited examples within
the literature on the use of nano-indentation and measurement of the
mechanical properties of commercially available membranes and biolm.
Therefore, the mechanical measurements at virgin and biofouled mem-
branes of the present study are extremely timely and such AFM charac-
terisation is a novel technique, when applied to RO membranes, which
holds promise for further elucidation of the mechanisms involved in
membrane fouling. The present study on industrially fouled membranes
has shown that the analysis of AFM force-distance data can be extended
beyond simple adhesion measurements to aid diagnosis of processes
problems such as fouling, as part of industrial membrane autopsies. It is
hoped that this encompassing research study within an industrial context
will aid in developing a rational strategy for the prevention of biofouling
and biolm formation, with economic and effective cleaning within

L.C. Powell et al. / Desalination 404 (2017) 313每321

321

desalination processes, which will maintain efcient membrane opera-
tion and prolong membrane life.

Acknowledgments

The authors would like to thank Youngpil Chun and In Seop Chang of
the Department of Environmental Science and Engineering, Gwangju
Institute of Science and Technology (GIST), Gwangju, South Korea for
the supply of fouled membranes. The authors would like to acknowl-
edge the British Council for Research Co-operation Funding and the
funding to start this project. Finally we thank Dr. Bob Lovitt of Swansea
University for his discussion.

References

[1] J. Landaburu-Aguirre, R. Garc赤a-Pacheco, S. Molina, L. Rodr赤guez-S芍ez, J. Rabad芍n, E.
Garc赤a-Calvo, Fouling prevention, preparing for re-use and membrane recycling. To-
wards circular economy in RO desalination, Desalination 393 (2016) 16每30.
[2] Y. Wyart, G. Georges, C. Deumie, C. Amra, P. Moulin, Membrane characterization by
microscope methods: multiscale structure, J. Membr. Sci. 315 (2008) 82每92.
[3] Y. Chun, P.T. Ha, L. Powell, J. Lee, D. Kim, D. Choi, R.W. Lovitt, I.S. Kim, S.S. Mitra, I.S.
Chang, Exploring microbial communities and differences of cartridge lters (CFs)
and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes for seawater desalination processes, Desali-
nation 298 (2012) 85每92.
[4] V.M. Kochkodan, N. Hilal, V.V. Goncharuk, L. Al-Khatib, T.I. Levadna, Effect of the sur-
face modication of polymer membranes on their microbiological fouling, Colloid J.
68 (3) (2006) 267每273.
[5] J. Zhang, K. Northcott, M. Duke, P. Scales, S.R. Gray, Inuence of pre-treatment com-
binations on RO membrane fouling, Desalination 393 (2016) 120每126.
[6] M.N. Abu Seman, M. Khayet, Z.I. Bin Ali, N. Hilal, Reduction of nanoltration mem-
brane fouling by UV-initiated graft polymerization technique, J. Membr. Sci. 355
(1每2) (2010) 133每141.
[7] M. Khayet, M.N.A. Seman, N. Hilal, Response surface modeling and optimization of
composite nanoltration modied membranes, J. Membr. Sci. 349 (1每2) (2010)
113每122.
[8] W.R. Bowen, N. Hilal, R.W. Lovitt, P.M. Williams, Atomic force microscope studies of
membranes: surface pore structures of Diao ultraltration membranes, J. Colloid
Interface Sci. 180 (2) (1996) 350每359.
[9] W.R. Bowen, N. Hilal, R.W. Lovitt, A.O. Sharif, P.M. Williams, Atomic force micro-
scope studies of membranes: force measurement and imaging in electrolyte solu-
tions, J. Membr. Sci. 126 (1) (1997) 77每89.
[10] N. Hilal, H. Al-Zoubi, N.A. Darwish, A.W. Mohammad, M. Abu Arabi, A comprehen-
sive review of nanoltration membranes: treatment, pretreatment, modelling, and
atomic force microscopy, Desalination 170 (3) (2004) 281每308.
[11] C.J. Wright, I. Armstrong, The application of atomic force microscopy force measure-
ments to the characterization of microbial surfaces, Surf. Interface Anal. 38 (2006)
1419每1428.
[12] I.J. Roh, J.-J. Kim, S.Y. Park, Mechanical properties and reverse osmosis performance
of interfacially polymerized polyamide thin lms , J. Membr. Sci. 197 (2002)
199每210.
[13] P.J. Evans, M.R. Bird, D. Rogers, C.J. Wright, Measurement of polyphenol-membrane
interaction forces during the ultraltration of black tea liquor, Colloids Surf. A
Physicochem. Eng. Asp. 335 (1每3) (2009) 148每153.
[14] J.-Y. Tian, Z.-L. Chen, Y.-L. Yang, H. Liang, J. Nan, G.-B. Li, Consecutive chemical
cleaning of fouled PVC membrane using NaOH and ethanol during ultraltration
of river water, Water Res. 44 (1) (2010) 59每68.
[15] H. Ivnitsky, I. Katz, D. Minz, G. Volvovic, E. Shimoni, E. Kesselman, R. Semiat, C.G.
Dosoretz, Bacterial community composition and structure of biolms developing
on nanoltration membranes applied to wastewater treatment, Water Res. 41
(17) (2007) 3924每3935.
[16] D.J. Johnson, N.J. Miles, N. Hilal, Quantication of particle-bubble interactions using
atomic force microscopy: a review, Adv. Colloid Interf. Sci. 127 (2) (2006) 67每81.
[17] W.R. Bowen, N. Hilal, R.W. Lovitt, C.J. Wright, A new technique for membrane char-
acterisation: direct measurement of force of adhesion of a single particle using an
atomic force microscope, J. Membr. Sci. 139 (1998) 269每274.
[18] W.R. Bowen, N. Hilal, R.W. Lovitt, C.J. Wright, Characterisation of membrane sur-
faces: direct measurement of biological adhesion using an atomic force microscope,
J. Membr. Sci. 154 (1999) 205每212.

[19] L. Zhang, Q.-Q. Ni, T. Natsuki, Mechanical properties of polybenzimidazole rein-
forced by carbon nanobers, Adv. Mater. Res. 47每50 (2008) 302每305.
[20] H. Xu, K. Chen, X. Guo,
J. Fang,
J. Yin, Synthesis of hyperbranched
polybenzimidazoles and their membrane formation, J. Membr. Sci. 288 (2007)
255每260.
[21] E.A. Franceschini, H.R. Corti, Elastic properties of naon, polybenzimidazole and poly
[2,5-benzimidazole] membranes determined by AFM tip nano-indentation, J. Power
Sources 188 (2009) 379每386.
[22] A.-Y. Jee, M. Lee, Comparative analysis on the nanoindentation of polymers using
atomic force microscopy, Polym. Test. 29 (2010) 95每99.
[23] T.-H. Fang, W.-J. Chang, S.-L. Tsai, Nanomechanical characterisation of polymer using
atomic force microscopy and nanoindentation, Microchem. J. 36 (2005) 55每59.
[24] J.Y. Chung, J.-H. Lee, K.L. Beers, C.M. Stafford, Stiffness, strength and ductility of nano-
scale thin lms and membranes: a combined wrinkling-cracking methodology,
Nano Lett. 11 (2011) 3361每3365.
[25] J. Llanos, P.M. Williams, S. Cheng, D. Rogers, C. Wright, A. Perez, P. Canizares, Char-
acterization of a ceramic ultraltration membrane in different operational states
after its use in a heavy-metal ion removal process, Water Res. 44 (2010) 3522每3530.
[26] L.C. Powell, A. Sowedan, S. Khan, C.J. Wright, K. Hawkins, E. Onsyen, R. Myrvold,
K.E. Hill, D.W. Thomas, The effect of alginate oligosaccharides on the mechanical
properties of Gram-negative biolms, Biofouling 29 (4) (2013) 413每421.
[27] C.J. Wright, M.K. Shah, L.C. Powell, I. Armstrong, Application of AFM from microbial
cell to biolm, Scanning 32 (2010) 134每149.
[28] D.P. Bakker, F.M. Huijs, J. de Vries, J.W. Klijnstra, H.J. Busscher, H.C. van der Mei, Bac-
terial deposition to uoridated and non-uoridated polyurethane coatings with dif-
ferent elastic modulus and surface tension in a parallel plate and a stagnation point
ow chamber, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 32 (2003) 179每190.
[29] S. Lee, M. Elimelech, Relating organic fouling of reverse osmosis membranes to in-
termolecular adhesion forces, Environ. Sci. Technol. 40 (2006) 980每987.
[30] J.A. Lichter, M.T. Thompson, M. Delgadillo, T. Nishikawa, M.F. Rubner, K.J. Van Vliet,
Substrata mechanical stiffness can regulate adhesion of viable bacteria,
Biomacromolecules 9 (2008) 1571每1578.
[31] Y.J. Oh, N.R. Lee, W. Jo, W.K. Jung, J.S. Lim, Effects of substrates on biolm formation
observed by atomic force microscopy, Ultramicroscopy 109 (2009) 874每880.
[32] W.A. Ducker, T.J. Senden, R.M. Pashley, Direct measurement of colloidal forces using
an atomic force microscope, Nature 353 (1991) 239每241.
[33] A. Touhami, B. Nysten, Y.F. Dufrene, Nanoscale mapping of the elasticity of microbial
cells by atomic force microscopy, Langmuir 19 (2003) 4539每4543.
[34] S.-Y. Kwak, D.W. Ihm, Use of atomic force microscopy and solid-state NMR spectros-
copy to characterise structure-property-performance correlation in high ux re-
verse osmosis (RO) membranes, J. Membr. Sci. 158 (1999) 143每153.
[35] M. Karime, S. Bouguecha, B. Hamrouni, RO membrane autopsy of Zarzis brackish
water desalination plant, Desalination 220 (2008) 258每266.
[36] E.O. Mohamedou, D.B.P. Surarez, F. Vince, P. Jaouen, M. Pontie, New lives for old re-
verse osmosis (RO) membranes, Desalination 53 (2010) 62每70.
[37] K. Bousso, B. Van der Bruggen, A. Volodin, J. Snauwaert, C. Van Hasendonck, C.
Vandecasteele, Roughness and hydrophobicity studies of nanolitration mem-
branes using different modes of AFM, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 286 (2005) 632每638.
[38] W.R. Bowen, T.A. Doneva, Atomic force microscopy studies of membranes: effect of
surface roughness on double-layer interactions and particle adhesion, J. Colloid In-
terface Sci. 229 (2000) 544每549.
[39] J.E. Elliott, M. Macdonald, J. Nie, C.N. Bowman, Structure and swelling of poly (acrylic
acid) hydrogels: effect of pH, ionic strength, and dilution on the crosslinked polymer
structure, Polymer 45 (2004) 1503每1510.
[40] J. Yang, S. Lee, E. Lee, J. Lee, S. Hong, Effect of solution chemistry on the surface prop-
erty of reverse osmosis membranes under seawater conditions, Desalination 249
(2009) 148每161.
[41] A. Hourai, J. Picard, H. Habarou, L. Galas, H. Vaudry, V. Heim, P. Di Martino, Rheology
of biolms formed at the surface of NF membranes in a drinking water production
unit, Biofouling 24 (4) (2008) 235每240.
[42] E.M. Vrijenhoek, S. Hong, M. Elimelech, Inuence of membrane surface properties
on initial rate of colloidal fouling of reverse osmosis and nanoltration membranes,
J. Membr. Sci. 188 (2001) 115每128.
[43] X. Sheng, Y.P. Ting, S.O. Pehkonen, The inuence of ionic strength, nutrients and pH
on bacterial adhesion to metals, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 321 (2008) 256每264.
[44] D. Elzo, I. Huisman, E. Middlelink, V. Gekas, Charge effects on inorganic membrane
performance in a cross-ow microltration process, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem.
Eng. Asp. 138 (1998) 145每159.
[45] A. Al-Amoudi, P. Williams, S. Mandale, R.W. Lovitt, Cleaning results of new and
fouled nanoltration membrane characterized by zeta potential and permeability,
Sep. Purif. Technol. 54 (2007) 234每240.

