Computer vision for sports: Current applications and research topics 

Graham Thomas 
a , Rikke Gade 
b , Thomas B. Moeslund 

b , 

, Peter Carr 
c , Adrian Hilton 

d 

a BBC R&D, 5th Floor, Dock House, MediaCity UK, Salford, M50 2LH, UK 
b Aalborg University, Rendsburggade 14, 90 0 0 Aalborg, Denmark 
c Disney Research, 4720 Forbes Ave., Suite 110, Pittsburgh, PA , 15231, USA 
d Centre for Vision, Speech & Signal Processing, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU27XH, UK 

article

info

Article history: 
Received 21 July 2016 
Revised 27 February 2017 
Accepted 22 April 2017 
Available online 26 April 2017 

Keywords: 
Player tracking 
Ball tracking 
Sports analysis 

 
abstract

The world of sports intrinsically involves fast and accurate motion that is not only challenging for com- 
petitors to master, but can be dicult for coaches and trainers to analyze, and for audiences to follow. 
The nature of most sports means that monitoring by the use of sensors or other devices xed to players 
or equipment is generally not possible. This provides a rich set of opportunities for the application of 
computer vision techniques to help the competitors, coaches and audience. This paper discusses a se- 
lection of current commercial applications that use computer vision for sports analysis, and highlights 
some of the topics that are currently being addressed in the research community. A summary of on-line 
datasets to support research in this area is included. 

 2017 Published by Elsevier Inc. 
1. Introduction
Computer vision already plays a key role in the world of sports. 
Some of the best-known current application areas are in sports 
analysis for broadcast, for example showing the position of play- 
ers or the ball as 3D models to allow the locations or trajectories 
to be explored in detail by a TV presenter. Computer vision is also 
used behind-the-scenes, in areas such as training and coaching, 
and providing help for the referee during a game. Motion capture 
systems, relying on reective cameras attached to athletes viewed 
by multiple cameras, are used in the training of professional ath- 
letes, and current research work is looking at how easier-to-deploy 
vision systems might be able to be used for similar tasks in the fu- 
ture. Other current research topics include analysis of how groups 
of players move, for applications like coaching in team sports, or 
automatically identifying key stages in a game for gathering statis- 
tics or automating the control of broadcast cameras. This paper 
presents an overview of how computer vision is currently being 
applied in sports, and discusses some of the current research that 
will lead to future commercial applications. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 looks at how fundamental techniques such as track- 
ing players and ball, and analyzing the motion of both individual 
players and teams, are being applied in today＊s commercial sys- 
tems. Section 3 looks at how these techniques are being further 
developed, making reference to examples from recent publications, 
including others in this special issue. It also provides an overview 
of some publicly-available datasets to support ongoing research. 

2. Current commercial applications of computer vision in 
sports 

This section looks at how various fundamental techniques are 
being applied in commercially-available systems today. Applica- 
tions that detect and track players and the ball are discussed, as 
well as those that track camera movement. Some current exam- 
ples of techniques being used commercially to analyze the motion 
of players (both individually and within teams) are also briey dis- 
cussed, as are applications in enhancing sports broadcasts. Charac- 
teristics of some example systems are listed in tables at the end of 
the section. 

2.1. Camera calibration and tracking 

Camera calibration is essential for the ball and player track- 
ing systems described in the following sections, and also for any 
systems that need to render graphics into the image that appear 
locked to the real world (or ＆tied-to-pitch＊). Those such as multi- 
camera ball tracking systems usually work with xed cameras, and 
many calibration approaches can be used, including the use of cal- 
ibration targets. Scene calibration may even use approaches such 
as rolling balls over the ground to account for non-planarity of the 
playing surface. 

4 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Fig. 1. Camera with sensors on lens and pan/tilt mount for virtual graphics overlay. 

Fig. 2. Example of virtual graphics overlaid on a rugby pitch [picture courtesy of 
Ericsson]. 

Systems that work with broadcast cameras need to be able to 
account for changing pan, tilt and zoom. The rst such systems re- 
lied on mechanical sensors on the camera mounting, and sensors 
on the lens to measure zoom and focus settings. Calibration data 
for the lens is needed to relate the ※raw§ values from these lens 
encoders to focal length. Ideally lens distortion and ※nodal shift§
(movement of the notional position of the pin-hole in a simple 
camera model, principally along the direction-of-view) should also 
be measured by the calibration process and accounted for when 
images are rendered. The position of the camera mounting in the 
reference frame of the sports pitch also needs to be measured, for 
example by using surveying tools such as a theodolite or range- 
nder. An example of a camera and lens equipped with sensors, for 
placing virtual graphics on athletics coverage, is shown in Fig. 1 . 
However, this approach is costly and not always practical, for ex- 
ample if the cameras are installed and operated by another broad- 
caster and only the video feed itself is made available. The sensor 
data has to be carried through the programme production chain, 
including the cabling from the camera to the outside broadcast 
truck, recording, and transmission to the studio. Also, any system 
that relies on sensor data cannot be used on archive recordings for 
which no data are available. 
Most current sports graphics systems that require camera cali- 
bration now achieve this using computer vision, using features at 
known positions in the scene. This avoids the need for specially- 
equipped lenses and camera mounts, and the problems with get- 
ting sensor data back from the camera. In sports such as soc- 
cer where there are prominent line markings on the pitch at 
well-dened positions, a line-based tracker is often used ( Thomas, 
2007 ). In other sports such as ice hockey or athletics, where lines 
are less useful, a more general feature point tracker can be used 
( Dawes et al., 2009 ). However, for live use in applications where 
there are very few reliable static features in view (such as swim- 
ming), sensor-based systems are still used. In particularly challeng- 
ing cases where a stable camera mounting is not available and 
very high angular accuracy is needed (approaching 1/10,0 0 0 of a 
degree) to cope with zoom lenses having a very narrow eld-of- 
view, it can be necessary to employ high-accuracy gyros. An ex- 
ample is the GyroTracker developed by Mo-Sys ( Mo-Sys, 2016 ). For 
airbourne systems, both gyros and GPS have been used, for exam- 
ple in coverage of the America＊s Cup ( Sportvision, 2016b ). 
The addition of some relatively simple image processing can al- 
low graphics to appear as if drawn on the ground, and not on top 
of people or other foreground objects or players, if the background 
is of a relatively uniform colour. For example, for soccer, a colour- 
based segmentation algorithm (referred to as a ※chromakeyer§ by 
broadcast engineers) tuned to detect green can be used to inhibit 
the drawing of graphics in areas that are not grass-coloured, so 
that they appear behind the players. The fact that the chromakeyer 

will not generate a key for areas such as mud can actually be an 
advantage, as long as such areas are not large, as this adds to the 
realism that the graphics are ※painted§ on the grass. Fig. 2 shows 
an example of graphics applied to rugby; other examples of this 
kind of system applied to American Football include the ※1st and 
Ten 
TM § line ( Sportvision, 2016a ) and the ※First Down Line§ ( Orad, 
2016 ). 

2.2. Detection and tracking 

2.2.1. Player detection and tracking 
Detecting the position of players at a given moment in time 
is the rst step in player tracking, and is also required in sports 
graphics systems for visualization of key moments of a game. Tech- 
niques used in commercial broadcast analysis systems range from 
those relying on a human operator to click on the feet of players in 
a calibrated camera image ( Bialik, 2014 ) to automated techniques 
that use segmentation to identify regions that likely to correspond 
to players ( Tamir and Oz, 2008 ). 
To help improve the performance of teams in sports such as 
soccer, analyzing the ways in which both individual players move, 
and the overall formation of the team, can provide very valuable 
insights for the team coach. Ideally, the coach would have access 
to a complete recording of the positions of all players many times 
per second throughout an entire training session or actual game. 
Commercial multi-camera player tracking systems tend to rely 
on a mixture of automated and manual tracking and player label- 
ing. STATS SportVu uses six cameras to track players in basket- 
ball; for football it uses a cluster of 3 HD cameras in single loca- 
tion, with an optional second cluster of 3 to provide height infor- 
mation ( STATS, 2017 ). Sportvision uses a camera-based system for 
its FIELDf/x player tracking in baseball ( McSurley and Rybarczyk, 
2011 ). Academic groups are also developing multi-camera player 
tracking systems with the aim of creating commercial products, 
such as such as the Computer Vision Laboratory at EPFL and its 
spin-out PlayfulVision ( EPFL, 2016 ). 
Fully-automated tracking and labelling of players remains an 
open challenge. Optical tracking systems must cope with players 
occluding each other and having similar appearance. Some recent 
research in this area is discussed in Section 3.2 . 

2.2.2. Ball tracking 
The ability to track a ball in low-latency real-time is impor- 
tant for both analysis in broadcast TV and helping the referee 
or umpire. One of the rst commercially-available multi-camera 
systems based on computer vision was developed by Hawk-Eye 
( Innovations, 2017c ) for tracking cricket balls in 3D, and rst 
deployed in 2001. It was subsequently applied to tennis; al
though broadcast cameras were initially used to provide the im- 
ages ( Owens et al., 2003 ), the system is generally now deployed 
with up to ten cameras set up around the court to capture live im- 
ages at up to 340 fps. ( Innovations, 2017a ). Being static, they are 
easier to calibrate, and short shutter times and higher frame rates 
can be used. There is a lot of prior knowledge about tennis that the 
system can use, including the size and appearance of the ball, its 
motion (once it is hit, its motion can be predicted using the laws of 
physics), and the area over which it needs to be tracked. The cam- 
eras and the geometry of the court can be accurately calibrated in 
advance. The system rst identies possible balls in each camera 
image, by identifying elliptical regions in the expected size range. 
Candidates for balls are linked with tracks across multiple frames, 
and plausible tracks are then matched between multiple cameras 
to generate a trajectory in 3D ( Owens et al., 2003 ). The system is 
suciently accurate that it can be used by the referee to determine 
whether a ball lands in or out, being rst used for this in 2005. 
It is claimed to have a mean error of 2.6 mm when compared to 
a high speed camera located on the playing surface ( Innovations, 
2017a ). When applied to cricket, it typically uses six cameras run- 
ning at 340 fps and achieves an accuracy of 5每10 mm ( Innovations, 
2017a ). It can be used to predict the path that the ball would have 
taken if the batsman had not hit it, or if it had not turned when 
bouncing, as shown in Fig. 3 . A similar system has been used for 
ociating in badminton by the Badminton World Federation since 
2014 ( Badminton, 2017 ). 
Sportvision＊s PITCHf/x system ( Fast, 2010 ) tracks a baseball us- 
ing a pair of cameras, and was rst deployed in 2006. The real- 
time data was used for ESPN＊s K-Zone visualization technology. In 
2015 ( Cole, 2014 ), Major League Baseball investigated radar-based 
ball tracking and optical-based player tracking using ChyronHego＊s 
TRACAB ( ChyronHego, 2017b ). 
In 2006, Protracer introduced a vision-based golf ball tracking 
system using a specialized image sensor ( Anderson, 2013 ). ESPN 
used the technology to generate visualizations over live broadcasts 
in 2010 ( Hall, 2014 ). 
More recently, various systems to determine whether a soccer 
has crossed the goal line have been developed. At the time of writ- 
ing (Feb 2017), FIFA has certied goal-line technology (GLT) in- 
stallations at 108 soccer grounds ( FIFA, 2016a ). Of these, 87 are 
based on a 7-camera computer vision system developed by Hawk- 
Eye, and 21 use a similar vision system developed by GoalControl 
( FIFA, 2016a ). The GoalRef system ( IIS, 2016 ) (an RF system with a 
transponder in the ball) developed by Fraunhofer IIS is also certi- 
ed by FIFA. The system from GoalControl was used for the 2014 
World Cup in Brazil ( FIFA, 2016c ), and the system from Hawkeye 
was used for the Euro 2016 championships in France ( UEFA, 2016 ). 

Fig. 4. Generation of a virtual view from a single camera image [picture courtesy 
of Ericsson]. 

2.3. Broadcast enhancements 

2.3.1. Player modeling 
Once players have been located, various approaches are used in 
current sports graphics systems to provide a visualization of the 
key moment from a range of viewpoints. 
An early example of the use of multiple cameras to provide 
a view from a range of points around an area of interest was 
the EyeVision system developed by CBS with help from Carnegie 
Mellon University for the Super Bowl in 2001 ( Mellon Univer- 
sity, 2017 ). 30 cameras with motorised zoom and focus on robotic 
pan/tilt heads followed a viewpoint on the pitch dened by an 
operator. A video switching system switched quickly between the 
views to give the impression of movement around the point of in- 
terest. 
Computer vision techniques have subsequently been used to 
simulate a smoothly-moving viewpoint from one or more xed 
cameras. A crude 3D model of the scene can be created from a sin- 
gle camera using a billboard approach ( Grau et al., 2001 ) by seg- 
menting the players from the background and placing them into 
a 3D model of a stadium, as textures on at planes positioned at 
the estimated locations. An example of this approach is shown in 
Fig. 4 produced by Ericsson (2016) ; this was rst used in 2004 
( R&D, 2017 ). This allows the generation of virtual views of the 
game from locations other than those at which real cameras are 
placed, for example to present a view of the scene that a linesman 
may have had when making an offside decision, or to provide a 
seamless ※y§ between an image from a real camera and a fully- 
virtual top-down view more suitable for presenting an analysis of 
tactics. 
This simple player modeling approach works well in many sit- 
uations, but the use of a single camera for creating the models 
restricts the range of virtual camera movement, with the planar 
nature of the players becoming apparent when the viewing direc- 
tion changes by more than about 15 degrees from that of the orig- 

6 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

inal camera. Furthermore, overlapping players cannot easily be re- 
solved. Approaches using two or more cameras, to create either a 
※2.5D§ model that allows smooth blending between multiple bill- 
boarded images, or to infer the player pose in 3D by matching 
player silhouettes to a library of pre-generated poses, are described 
in Popa et al. (2014) , and techniques like this are available in com- 
mercial products such as Viz Libero ( Vizrt, 2016 ). 
The use of a large number of cameras allows a wider range of 
movement and more accurate models to be created. Such a system 
( Technologies, 2017 ) was used at the 2012 Olympics for gymnas- 
tics, and then under the name EyeVision 360 at the 2016 Super- 
bowl, incorporating 36 cameras ( Takahashi, 2017 ). It has also been 
used for other sports including tennis and basketball ( Petrovic, 
2017 ). 
An alternative solution to these problems is to use pre- 
generated 3D player models, manually selected and positioned to 
match the view from the camera. It can take a skilled operator 
many minutes to model such a scene, which is acceptable for a 
post-match analysis programme but too slow for use in an instant 
replay. The player models lack realism, but can be at a level of de- 
tail higher than can readily be achieved by a camera-based system. 

2.3.2. Analysing motion of players 
Analysing or visualising the motion of players at key moments 
in sport can give useful insights for both trainers and broadcasters. 
Training at elite level may involve the use of dedicated motion cap- 
ture systems with multiple calibrated cameras and markers placed 
on the player. However, such marker-based systems are impractical 
to use in lower-end training sessions and during actual competi- 
tions. In these situations, computer vision using a single camera or 
a small number of cameras can still provide useful insights. Most 
commercial systems are currently limited to providing visualisation 
of the player＊s movement rather than detailed analysis, as accurate 
markerless pose estimation is very challenging. 
The motion of the segmented foreground person or object can 
be illustrated by overlaying a sequence of ※snapshots§ on the back- 
ground, to create a motion ※trail＊, allowing the recent motion of the 
foreground object or person to be seen. This produces a similar ef- 
fect to that which can be achieved by illuminating the scene with 
a stroboscope and capturing an image using a camera with a long 
exposure. An early example of this was an analysis tool for snooker 
( Storey, 1984 ) which exploited the relatively benign nature of this 
sport (cameras are often static, and balls are easily segmented from 
the plain green background). 
A more recent example of this kind of analysis tool ( Prandoni, 
2003 ) is often used to show movement in sports such as diving 
or ice skating. It is necessary to compensate for any pan/tilt/zoom 
of the camera, so that the segmented snapshots of the people are 
shown in the correct place; this can be achieved using image anal- 
ysis techniques like those discussed above. This application is rel- 
atively benign to segmentation errors which might result in the 
inclusion of parts of the background around the edges of a seg- 
mented person, as the person is overlaid on the background re- 
gion from which they were originally extracted. By stitching to- 
gether the background areas from a sequence of images and view- 
ing this as one large image, it is possible to illustrate the entire 
movement of a person over a given period of time, as shown in 
Fig. 5 . Where the person tends to occupy the same location over 
a period of time, such as an ice skater spinning around her axis, a 
set of successive images can be separated out and displayed on an 
arbitrary background, like a series of frames in a lm. 
An extension of this class of technique can be used to overlay 
the performance of several sports people during successive heats 
of an event, such as a downhill ski race ( Reusens et al., 2007 ). This 
requires the calibration of the moving camera in a repeatable way, 
so that the background can be aligned from one heat to the next, 

Fig. 5. An illustration of motion using a series of snapshots of the action [picture 
courtesy of Dartsh]. 

and may also require the timing to be synchronised so that com- 
petitors are shown at the same time from the start of the heat. 
Recently, machine learning and data mining techniques have 
been used to better understand raw player tracking data in team 
sports. To some degree, the methods of analysis that can be used 
are somewhat dependent on how the data was acquired. For in- 
stance, the noise characteristics of optical tracking are quite differ- 
ent from those of radio frequency tracking. As a result, we only 
highlight a few recent examples of player tracking analysis, since 
this topic is mostly outside of the scope of computer vision. 
Labelling semantic events, such as ※pick and roll§ in basketball, 
is a popular topic when analysing player tracking data ( McQueen 
et al., 2014 ). These labels enable broadcast enhancements such as 
advanced statistics ( e.g. estimated shot quality Chang et al., 2014 ) 
or faster querying of video archives via keywords. In some cases, 
the analysis is used as a coaching tool, such as ※ghost players§
which illustrate a model＊s predicted optimal positions for players 
( Lowe, 2013 ). 

2.4. The impact of computer vision technologies on sport 

The use of computer vision and associated graphics technolo- 
gies to provide insight and explanation into sports events has been 
a part of the evolution of sports TV, building on older techniques 
such as the slow-motion replay. These developments have been 
largely embraced by viewers and broadcasters. However, from the 
time that slow-motion replay rst became available; it has allowed 
refereeing decisions to be examined in detail, inevitably leading to 
debate. Examples of comments made in the context of football in- 
clude ( Stack Exchange, 2017 ): 
 Uncertainty is a part of the game. The referee and linesmen are 
the arbiters of the action. Instant replay would limit their au- 
thority. 
 Football is global. Many places do not have access to the tech- 
nology necessary to implement instant replay. 
 Football is a fast-paced game with few opportunities for stop- 
page. Instant replay would unnecessarily slow the pace. 

A Video Referee has been used in the National Basketball As- 
sociation since 2002 ( Broussard, 2017 ), following cases where the 
referee could clearly have been seen to make a mistake by looking 
at replays. Similar pressure led to FIFA approving the use of goal- 
line technologies in 2012 ( Stack Exchange, 2017 ), and the debut of 
the Hawk-Eye tennis system for line calls at the 2006 US Open has 
changed the dynamics of professional tennis ( Fetters, 2012 ). 
Player tracking technology has revolutionised training and 
scouting for players in sports such as football and basketball. Some 
insights into how the data is used in basketball can be found in 
Aldridge (2013) , including comments that players appreciated be- 
ing shown data to back up what the coach was telling them, but 
also that there are fears that statistics could be used against play- 
ers when negotiating contracts. 

2.5. Player tracking using alternatives to computer vision 

For some sports, tag-based RF tracking technology (such as GPS) 
has been used as an alternative to vision-based systems, for ex- 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

7 

Table 1 
Examples of some commercial systems: camera tracking, overlays and virtual views. 

Manufacturer & 
system 

Primary application 
area 

Camera conguration 
and approach 

Speed of operation and 
degree of autonomy 

Ericsson: Piero 
( Ericsson, 2016 ) 

Overlay graphics 
for TV and 
virtual views 
using either 
fully-virtual or 
image-based 
player models 

Single pan/tilt/zoom 
broadcast camera under 
control of cameraman, no 
additional sensors, uses 
lines ( Thomas, 2007 ) 
and/or point features 
( Dawes et al., 2009 ) 

Camera tracking: automatic 
(latency of a few 
frames); Initialisation: 
semi-automatic or 
automatic ( Thomas, 
2007 ); Player modelling: 
billboards ( Grau et al., 
2001 ) or manually-posed 
3D player models 

Precision and 
performance 
characteristics 

Tracking stability 
generally better 
than 1 pixel 

Mo-Sys: Gyro 
tracker ( Mo-Sys, 
2016 ) 

CBS/CMU: Eye 
vision ( Mellon 
University, 2017 ) 

Replay Technologies 
(Intel) FreeD 
( Technologies, 
2017 ) 

Tracking system to 
drive overlay 
graphics for TV 
for Red Bull air 
race 

Moving viewpoint 
in a ring around 
an area of 
interest 

Free-viewpoint 
video for sports 

Inertial sensors mounted 
on a single camera (no 
computer vision used) 

Assumed to be very low 

Nearly 10,0 0 0th of 
a degree 
( Mo-Sys, 2016 ) 

30 cameras on robotic 
pan/tilt mounts at 
intervals of 7 degrees. No 
view interpolation. 

20每40 5K high-denition 
cameras (xed 
mountings). Foreground 
and background 
modelled separately 
( Haimovitch, 2015 ) 

Focus of interest set by an 
operator. Replay available 
virtually instantly. 

No information 
readily available 

Produces results quickly 
enough to use for replays 
in-venue or on TV (no 
info readily available on 
actual processing time) 

No information 
readily available 

How widely used 

As of 2011, Piero was in 
use in over 40 countries. 
At the 2010 World Cup in 
South Africa over 85% of 
all analysis effects used 
in the world feed came 
from Piero ( R&D, 2017 ). 
Other similar systems 
include ( Orad, 2016 ), 
( Sportvision, 2016a ) and 
( Vizrt, 2016 ). 

Specically developed for 
Red Bull air race 

Used for Superbowl XXXV 
broadcast, 2001. 
Apparently not used on 
subsequent Superbowls. 

First used for gymnastics at 
2012 Olympics. First 
Superbowl use in 2016 
(36 cameras, branded as 
EyeVision 360 
( Takahashi, 2017 )). Used 
for basketball (3 
stadiums tted with 28 
cameras for the 2016 
NBA All-Star game). Also 
used for tennis and 
baseball ( Petrovic, 2017 ). 

ample tags using GPS positioning and including heartrate moni- 
tors have been used for rugby, specically for analyzing physiolog- 
ical demands on players, fatigue during game, and rehabilitation 
and injury prevention ( Gilligan, 2014 ). Tag-based systems can suf- 
fer from problems like short battery life (reportedly under 4 h for 
some systems) and potential interference problems in bad weather. 
Tag-based systems are not restricted to outdoor scenarios where 
GPS signals can be received; various systems are available that use 
in-stadium transponders to transmit or receive reference signals. 
The need to get players to wear tags can meet with resistance, for 
example wearables are currently barred from being used during 
NBA games, and the data gathered from them cannot be used in 
NBA player contract negotiations ( Leung, 2017 ). 

2.6. Summary of some commercial systems 

The tables below summarise some of the commercial systems 
referred to in this section. Table 1 focuses on systems primarily 
providing enhancements for viewers, using technology including 
camera tracking and view synthesis. Table 2 gives some details 
of player tracking systems, used for both coaching and broadcast 
statistics. Table 3 summarises some systems for high-precision ball 
tracking for both ociating and broadcast enhancements. 

3. Open issues and current research areas 

To fully automate the video analysis of sports events many is- 
sues are still open for research. The numerous different aspects of 
a sports event start when deciding how to capture the event; mod- 
elling the pose and viewpoint of a camera and calibrating large 
camera networks is still very challenging. There is then the key 
challenge of detecting and analyzing humans. Sports videos range 

from close-up views of single athletes to wide views including 
spectators at large stadiums, presenting a wide range of different 
scenarios. In this section we will discuss the largest research ar- 
eas at the moment, which include detection and tracking of play- 
ers and balls, as well as extracting semantics from sports videos. 
Lastly, we will give an overview of publicly available datasets use- 
ful for improving and comparing the research in these topics. 
For sport as a human centred activity, the rst step in most au- 
tomatic analysis is to locate and segment each person of interest, 
and possibly follow this person over the duration of the video. Sev- 
eral challenges inuence these tasks. The body posture of a per- 
son can vary greatly during sports exercises, decreasing the perfor- 
mance of any standard human/pedestrian detector. Another signif- 
icant challenge is occlusion. People can be partly or fully occluded 
by, e.g., equipment, obstacles, or other players. In any contact sport 
or team sport occlusion between people is a frequent problem and 
includes cases of collisions and interactions between several play- 
ers simultaneously. 

3.1. Detection 

3.1.1. Detection of players 
The choice of detection methods depend on the type of footage, 
such as moving vs. static cameras, single vs. multiple cameras, 
static vs. changing background, and degree of occlusion. 
Using static cameras it is possible to build a background model 
and detect players with simple methods like image differencing 
and background subtraction ( Reno et al., 2015 ). On courts with uni- 
formly coloured surfaces similar approaches can be applied with 
moving cameras using a colour-based elimination of the ground 
( Rao and Pati, 2015 ). These methods are often fast and well-suited 
for real-time performance. However, noise and missed detections 

8 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Table 2 
Examples of some commercial systems: player tracking. 

Manufacturer & system 

Primary application Camera conguration 
area 
and approach 

Speed of operation and 
degree of autonomy 

STATS SportVU ( STATS, 
2017 ) 

Player and ball 
tracking for 
sports analytics 
for coaching/ 
training and 
broadcast, best 
known for 
basketball 

For basketball (NBA): 6 
cameras used; for 
football: a cluster of 3 
HD cameras in single 
location, with an optional 
second cluster of 3 to 
provide height 
information. Some 
technical details in Tamir 
and Oz (2008) . 

Real time operation at 
25Hz. Data can be 
augmented with 
play-by-play events from 
the ocial event feed 
( STATS, 2017 ). 

ChyronHego TRACAB 
( ChyronHego, 2017b ) 

Two clusters of 3 HD 
cameras 

Two operators assign 
player labels. Delivers 
※live tracking of all 
moving objects with a 
maximum delay of just 
three frames§
( ChyronHego, 2017b ). 

Player and ball 
tracking for 
coaching/training 
and broadcast in 
sports including 
football, tennis, 
basketball, 
baseball, cricket 
and American 
football 

Table 3 
Examples of some commercial systems: ball tracking. 

Manufacturer & system 

Primary application 
area 

Camera conguration 
and approach 

Speed of operation and 
degree of autonomy 

Hawkeye Cricket 
system ( Innovations, 
2017c ) 

Ociating in 
cricket, and 
broadcast 
enhancement 

Six 340 frames per second 
cameras ( Innovations, 
2017e ) 

Real time, autonomous 

Hawkeye Tennis system 
( Innovations, 2017d ) 

Ociating in 
tennis, and 
broadcast 
enhancement 

Real time, autonomous 

Up to ten cameras set up 
around the court to capture 
live images at up to 340 
fps. ( Innovations, 2017a ). 
Details of approach to ball 
tracking (as of 2003) in 
Owens et al. (2003) . 

Hawkeye Goal-line 
system ( Innovations, 
2017b ) 

Ociating in 
football 

7 cameras per goal, most 
commonly on the roof of 
the stadium. 

Real time, autonomous 

Precision and 
performance 
characteristics 

For basketball: The data 
is tracked within 2每3 
secs of capture; 
spotters (operators) 
can make changes to 
the assigned player 
labels. Sometimes, in 
scrums where several 
players are clustered, 
even though the 
player＊s heads remain 
visible, the system 
can temporarily lose 
track of who＊s who. 
Aldridge (2013) . 

Delivers ※positioning 
accuracy across the 
whole eld of play of 
less than the width 
of a hand§
( ChyronHego, 2017b ). 

How widely used 

Used by all 30 NBA teams 
( Wolverton, 2017 ) 

Installed in 125 arenas and 
is used in more than 
20 0 0 televised matches 
and games per year 
around the world 
( ChyronHego, 2017a ). 
Employed across entire 
leagues such as the 
English Premier League. 
Details of approach to 
ball tracking (as of 2003) 
in Owens et al. 
(2003) .German 
Bundesliga, Spanish La 
Liga and Major League 
Baseball, as well as some 
of the largest 
international sports 
tournaments including 
UEFA Champions League 
and FIFA World Cup. 

Precision and 
performance 
characteristics 

5每10 mm accuracy. Ball 
size in image is circa 
10 pixels, and the 
centre is found to circa 
1/3 pixel ( Innovations, 
2017e ). 

Mean error of 2.6 mm 
when compared to a 
high speed camera 
located on the playing 
surface ( Innovations, 
2017a ). 

+

FIFA requirements 
include a positional 
accuracy of 
 /-1.5 cm 
and that an indication 
of a goal is provided in 
1 s or less, as well as 
immunity to snow and 
toilet rolls ( FIFA, 2014 ). 

How widely used 

Used by host 
broadcasters at major 
Test, ODI and Twenty20 
matches around the 
world since 2001 and 
in 2008 was approved 
for use by the ICC and 
added as part of the 
Decision Review 
System 

First used in 2002 as 
part of the BBCs Davis 
Cup coverage. First 
used for ociating in 
2005. Now used in over 
80 tournaments around 
the world and at all 
Grand Slam events. 
Innovations (2017a) . 

Used by the English 
Premier League, 
German Bundesliga, 
Dutch Eredivisie, Italian 
Serie A and FIFA 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

9 

should be expected due to other moving objects, similar colours in 
foreground and background, and effects such as changing lighting 
conditions and shadows. Many methods for ne tuning and post- 
processing of foreground images have been proposed and it re- 
mains a challenge open for research ( Gade et al., 2012; Reno et al., 
2015 ). 
Applying trained classiers has become the most popular strat- 
egy for pedestrian detection. Naturally, as both are focused on de- 
tection of humans, this approach has been transferred to detection 
of sports players as well. However, sports players generally have 
much larger variations in pose, and the view-point and distance 
might change signicantly between pedestrian and sports videos. 
Using the AdaBoost algorithm for training a classier with HOG 
features, Faulkner and Dick (2015) shows that it is important to 
train the system with samples from the same video types, in this 
case Australian Rules Football, as a detector trained on standard 
pedestrian images performs very poorly on sports data. A similar 
approach with AdaBoost and Haar features is presented for detec- 
tion of basketball players ( Ivankovic et al., 2012 ), but the conclu- 
sion here is that although reasonable detection rates are obtained, 
the false positive rate is too high for the method to be applicable. 
In team sports, additional steps have to be introduced to en- 
sure the consistency in identity of the detected players. One ap- 
proach is to solve the assignment task with classication of each 
object based on unique appearance features, like the jersey num- 
ber ( Gerke et al., 2015; Ye et al., 2005 ). Since these features are 
often only visible in a subset of frames, the classication can be 
combined with temporal tracking of the player to keep track of 
the identity ( Lu et al., 2011 ). This topic will be further discussed in 
Section 3.2 . 

3.1.2. Detection of the ball 
Many sports types have the game centered around a ball, which 
makes automatic detection of a ball interesting for classication 
of goals and other events, or statistics like ball possession. As de- 
scribed in Section 2.2.2 , computer vision based goal detection sys- 
tems are now developed to a point where these have been com- 
mercialised and trusted even for World Cup games. However, these 
systems utilise multiple view high-speed cameras covering each 
goal area, which means that extending a similar ball tracking sys- 
tem to the entire eld would require an unrealistically large num- 
ber of calibrated cameras. Detection and tracking the motion of the 
ball is particularly challenging due to fast motion and the small 
size of a ball compared to both humans and eld sizes in most 
sports types. 
Most ball detection algorithms get reasonable results by de- 
tecting moving objects and sorting these ball candidates on area, 
colour and shape ( Chakraborty and Meher, 2012; Halbinger and 
Metzler, 2015; Wu et al., 2006 ). However, often a ball is partly or 
fully occluded by the players, in which case a pure detection algo- 
rithm will not be useful. Instead, combining detection and tracking 
might allow for synthesising the ball position based on the trajec- 
tory. This will be further discussed in Section 3.2 . 

3.2. Tracking 

3.2.1. Tracking players 
Tracking is one of the largest research areas of computer vi- 
sion, with hundreds of papers published each year. Compared to 
other applications of human tracking, tracking of sports players is 
particularly challenging due to fast and erratic motion, similar ap- 
pearance of players in team sports, and often close interactions be- 
tween players is part of a game. Many multi-purpose tracking al- 
gorithms assume linear motion resulting in poor performance in 
sports compared to regular surveillance videos. Multi-target track- 
ers commonly solve the data association problem with appearance 

models. However, this may fail in team sports due to the ambigu- 
ity of appearance between players on each team. In this section we 
will give an overview of some of the methods focusing specically 
on solving the challenges of tracking in sports videos. 
Recent research has investigated the use of context informa- 
tion, assuming that players react to the current game situation as 
a group. In Liu and Carr (2014) a method was presented using 
this approach by formulating a number of game context features, 
which signicantly improved the tracking results on eld hockey 
and basketball datasets. Context information has also been applied 
for tracking players in American Football ( Zhang et al., 2012 ), and 
for soccer and volleyball ( Xiao et al., 2014 ). 
Sports games can also be modelled as a constrained closed- 
world scenario, in terms of both physical space and players§ move- 
ments ( Kristan et al., 2009 ). The severe challenges with occlusions 
observed in team sports have been addressed by a number of pa- 
pers. Figueroa et al. (2006) use a graph representation, which in- 
cludes the number of people assumed to be included in each de- 
tected blob. A different solution to occlusion handling is adding 
more cameras viewing the scene from different angles ( Kasuya 
et al., 2008; Xu et al., 2004 ). 
Many sports videos originate from broadcasts, which are inter- 
rupted by commercials, replays, and changing camera view. Con- 
sistent tracking of individual players across these interruptions is 
dicult due to the similar appearance of players. Soomro et al. 
(2015) propose a method to associate the tracks between video 
clips by modelling the team formation as a graph with each node 
representing a player position. 
Manafard et al. provides a detailed survey on player tracking 
in soccer videos ( Manafard et al., 2016 ). 

3.2.2. Tracking the ball 
Constructing trajectories of a ball is often of interest, e.g., for 
analysing shot types, play dynamics, and event detections in many 
sports types, or for virtual replays. Many proposed methods are 
physics based, starting with a set of ball detections, for which a 
physical model is tted and the trajectory can be constructed and 
extended ( Chakraborty and Meher, 2013; Chen et al., 2009; Leo 
et al., 2008 ). 
In sports like tennis, where the ball is fully visible in most 
frames, it is possible to construct tracklets, which can be connected 
in a later association step ( Yan et al., 2014 ). 
Tracking the ball is harder in team sports, where several play- 
ers can occlude the ball, and it is possible that players are in pos- 
session of the ball, either in their hands or between their feet. By 
combining knowledge on the positions of players and ball, the pos- 
session of the ball can be modelled and used as part of the ball 
trajectory ( Wang et al., 2014; 2016; Wei et al., 2015 ). Maksai et al. 
(2016) continues this approach by dening a number of states the 
ball can take, such as ying, rolling , or in_possession . For each state 
specic constraints apply, which for the ying and rolling states are 
based on physics. 
As opposed to players, the ball cannot be assumed to move on 
the ground plane, but rather in an unconstrained 3-dimensional 
space. To solve ambiguities often a setup of multiple calibrated 
cameras is applied ( Ren et al., 2009 ) or even a stereo setup or RGB- 
D sensor for estimating depth in smaller areas, like a table tennis 
environment ( Tamaki and Saito, 2014 ). 

3.3. Semantics 

3.3.1. Semantics from video 
With the rapidly-growing amount of video data being captured 
and published, methods are sought for automatically labelling the 
data. This can be done by extracting the semantics from visual fea- 
tures. 

10 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Labelling can be divided into two levels of detail, with the rst 
level being the sports genre, or in other words the general activ- 
ity observed during a video clip. The second level is the individual 
actions performed, where one activity can consist of several differ- 
ent actions. Action recognition is often coupled with localization 
of the action in both space and time. Combining the two levels of 
categorisation, Wilson et al. (2014) detect events during video clips 
and use those for classication of the activity. 
Activity recognition is often performed for an entire video clip. 
In these cases visual information about the environment, such as 
court colour and lines, can be extracted and used for classica- 
tion ( Krishna Mohan and Yegnanarayana, 2010; Mutchima and San- 
guansat, 2012; Yuan and Wan, 2004 ). For general-purpose facilities, 
like public indoor arenas, where the environment does not pro- 
vide information on the activity type, it has been investigated how 
to use only the information of players＊ positions over time. This 
data can originate from both visual tracking, but also other track- 
ing technologies. From position data occupancy heatmaps ( Gade 
and Moeslund, 2014 ) or trajectories ( Lee and Hoff, 2007 ) can be 
constructed and used for classication. 
Action recognition in videos can be used for automatic gener- 
ation of statistics, like shot type, and for indexing of videos for 
easier browsing or generating summaries. The purpose of gener- 
ating highlights or summarization of games is to shorten record- 
ings of full-length games while still preserving the most interest- 
ing content, for example for TV news or personalized multime- 
dia content on request ( Chen et al., 2011 ). Summarizations are of- 
ten constructed by event detection and classication (e.g., goals 
scored) ( de Sousa et al., 2011; Zawbaa et al., 2011 ) or cinemato- 
graphic features (e.g., camera motion and shot type) ( Ekin et al., 
2003; Nguyen and Yoshitaka, 2014 ). The most interesting events 
to detect during a game are often goals or score, but events such 
as penalties, near misses, and shots can also be of interest. Kapela 
et al. (2014) propose a method for detecting all of these interesting 
events in eld sports, by including automatic interpretation of the 
scoreboard, and scene analysis based on the shot sequence. 
Highlights can also be detected by the excitement level of the 
crowd, extracted from audio or audio-visual cues ( Boril et al., 2010; 
Hanjalic, 2005; Kolekar and Sengupta, 2015 ). 
Analysing the actions of individual sports types can also be 
used for performance analysis. For combat sports, Behendi et al. 
(2016) demonstrated the possibility of tracking boxers and classi- 
fying punches using RGB and depth data. 

3.3.2. Semantics from data mining 
Digging a little deeper into the activities performed at the 
sports eld, analysing the motion of both individuals and teams 
can reveal information about behaviour and performance. These 
methods are related to data mining, and the data can originate 
from different tracking technologies, like radio frequency systems, 
GPS, or computer vision. In this section, however, we will only 
highlight methods based on video data. 
Recognizing team behaviour, such as specic formations and 
play types, can be used for informing a tracking system, or for 
extraction of specic events. Bialkowski et al. (2014) use an oc- 
cupancy map representation of team behaviour in eld hockey 
with team classications for each detection. Similarly, Atmosukarto 
et al. (2014) use players＊ positions to detect team formation, line 
of scrimmage and formation frame in American football videos. 
Fu et al. (2011) show that the screen strategy in basketball can 
be detected based on players＊ trajectories. Likewise, Perse et al. 
(2009) present a trajectory based method for analysis of team ac- 
tivities in basketball. However, obtaining reliable trajectories is still 
a challenge, as discussed in Section 3.2 , and the work presented 
in Perse et al. (2009) is based on only semi-automatic tracking re- 
sults. 

3.4. Public datasets 

In this section we present an overview of publicly available 
sports video datasets for which annotations are available. Shared 
datasets make it possible to compare the performance of differ- 
ent algorithms directly on the same data and improve the trans- 
parency of the research in the eld. Furthermore, the extremely 
time-consuming process of capturing and annotating large quan- 
tities of diverse video can be reduced by sharing the data among 
researchers. 
Table 4 provides an overview of some datasets and their char- 
acteristics. The datasets can be considered in two main categories: 
Still images or video, typically from moving cameras, of single ath- 
letes, with the purpose of activity recognition, and team sports 
videos, often captured with several static cameras, for tracking and 
event detections. One dataset focuses on the pose and actions of 
spectators of a sports event rather than players. 
The datasets available for activity and action recognition are 
large with a great variety of sports actions. Most of these datasets 
are compiled from video sources like YouTube or mobile apps, 
hence unconstrained in view, scale, camera motion, etc. Vary- 
ing from 150 to more than 1 million sequences per dataset, the 
amount of data is huge, but this reects the variation and the 
number of different actions at the most ne-grained level, e.g., the 
Sports-1M Dataset with 487 activity classes. 
The datasets of team sports activities still need additions to rep- 
resent the variety between teams, environment, etc. The reason for 
the more limited quantity of video in this category may be partly 
because of the complex camera setup needed to cover the entire 
eld, as well as the duration needed to represent different game 
events and transitions. Access to data is also restricted by rights 
issues for broadcast coverage of many sports events. Datasets are 
now available representing basketball, handball, soccer and squash 
with a few sequences per activity, sucient to evaluate algorithms 
for tasks such as multi-target tracking. However, for approaches 
including game context or analysing sports-specic events, larger 
quantities of data from the same sports activity are needed. 
The remainder of this section will describe each dataset and 
present sample images. 
 APIDIS Basketball Dataset 
The APIDIS Basketball Dataset ( Vleeschouwer et al., 2008 ) pro- 
vides 16 min of basketball video captured with 7 cameras 
around and above a basketball court. Example frames from four 
views are shown in Fig. 6 . The dataset is manually annotated 
with basketball events for the entire game, and positions of 
players, referees, baskets, and ball for one minute. Measure- 
ments and calibration images are provided for calibrating each 
camera to the common world coordinate system. 
The dataset is available for download from http://sites. 
uclouvain.be/ispgroup/index.php/Softwares/APIDIS . 
 CVBASE ＊06 
The CVBASE ＊06 Dataset ( Pers et al., 2006 ) provides three video 
subsets suitable for tracking and team/individual activity recog- 
nition. The rst subset is a 10 min recording of European 
(team) handball. Video is available from three synchronized 
cameras: Two overhead cameras and one side-view (manually 
operated) camera. Trajectories are available for 7 players for 
all 10 min, in court coordinates and in coordinate systems of 
both overhead cameras. Furthermore, team activities (offense, 
defense, etc.) and individual activities (pass, shot, etc.) are man- 
ually annotated by a sport expert. 
The second subset is recordings of 2 squash matches (9 and 
10 min duration). Trajectories are available for both players 
in court and camera coordinates. Furthermore, manual anno- 
tations include phases (rallies and passive phases), stroke type 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

11 

Table 4 
Characteristics of the datasets referred to in this section. 

Dataset 

Sports 

Moving cam. 

Annotations 

Number of seq. 

Avg. length 

Basketball 

No 

Handball 

1 moving 
2 static (overhead) 

Squash 

No (overhead) 

Basketball 
Soccer 

No (overhead) 
No 

8 types 

Still images 

Player trajectories 
Ball trajectory 
Event detections 
Trajectories 
Team activities 
Ind. activities 
Trajectories 
Game actions 
NA 
Player trajectories 
Ball trajectories 
Joint locations 

16 types 

Yes 

Activity labels 

1 

1 

2 

1 
1 

16 min 

10 min 

9m 46s 

5 min 
2 min 

20 0 0 

Still images 

Quality 
℅ 1200 pix, 22fps 
1600 
7 Cameras 
℅ 288 pix, 25fps 
384 

℅ 288 pix, 25fps 
384 
℅ 288 pix, 25fps 
368 
℅ 1088 pix, 25fps 
1920 
6 synchronized cameras 
Varying 

APIDIS 
Basketball 
Dataset 

CVBASE ＊06 

ISSIA 
Dataset 
Leeds Sports 
Pose Dataset 
Olympic Sports 
Dataset 

S-HOCK dataset 
(spectators) 

Soccer Video and 
Player Position 
Dataset 
Sports Videos 
in the Wild 

Sports-1M 
Dataset 
UCF Sports 
Action Dataset 

UIUC Sports 
Event dataset 

UIUC2 

Hockey 

No 

Soccer 

No 

30 types 

Yes 

487 types 

Yes 

10 types 

Yes 

8 

Still images 

Badminton No 

Spectator position 
Spectator head pose 
Spectator posture 
Spectator action 
Trajectories 
Ball position (subset) 

Activity label 
Action label 
Action localization 
Activity labels 

Bounding boxes 
Activity labels 
Human gaze (viewer) 
Activity labels 

800 

15 

NA 

YouTube 

31 s 

30 fps 

5 

45 min 

4200 

15.1 s 

High res. panorama 
and three single views 
℅ 270 pix 
480 
℅ 360 pix, 30 fps 
or 480 

1,133,158 

5 m 36 s 

150 

6.3 s 

YouTube 
℅ 480 pix, 10fps 
720 

1579 

Still images 

Varying 

Volleyball 
Activity Dataset 

Volleyball 

No 

Motion type 
Shot type 
Shot moment 
Bounding boxes 
Player detections 
Action detections 

3 

6 

2m 31s 

YouTube 

23 min 

℅ 1080, 25fps 
1920 

Fig. 6. Example frames from four views from the APIDIS Basketball Dataset ( Vleeschouwer et al., 2008 ). 

Fig. 7. Example frames from the CVBASE ＊06 dataset ( Pers et al., 2006 ). 

(lob, drop, cross, etc.), stroke outcome (play, let, error), shot 
type (forehand and backhand). 
The third subset consists of two synchronized overhead cam- 
eras capturing 5 min of basketball. No annotations are available 
for the basketball subset. Fig. 7 shows frames from each subset. 

The dataset is available for download from http://vision.fe. 
uni- lj.si/cvbase06/downloads.html . 
 ISSIA Soccer Dataset 
The ISSIA Dataset ( D＊Orazio et al., 2009 ) contains video from a 
soccer game captured with 6 cameras, three on each side of the 

12 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Fig. 8. Example frames from three views from the ISSIA Dataset ( D＊Orazio et al., 2009 ). 

Fig. 9. Example images from Leeds Sports Pose Dataset ( Johnson and Everingham, 2010 ). 

eld. Example frames from one side of the eld are shown in 
Fig. 8 . Positions of players, referees, and ball is manually anno- 
tated in each from of each camera. Calibration images and mea- 
surements are available for calibrating each camera to a com- 
mon world coordinate system. 
The dataset is available for download from http://pspagnolo. 
jimdo.com/download/ . 
 Leeds Sports Pose Dataset 
This dataset ( Johnson and Everingham, 2010 ) contains 20 0 0 
pose-annotated images of mostly sports people gathered from 
Flickr with the following tags: Athletics, badminton, baseball, 
gymnastics, parkour, soccer, tennis and volleyball. Each image 
has been annotated with 14 joint locations for human pose es- 
timation. Example images are presented in Fig. 9 . 
The dataset is available for download from http://www.comp. 
leeds.ac.uk/mat4saj/lsp.html . 
 Olympic Sports Dataset 
The Olympic Sports Dataset ( Niebles et al., 2010 ) shown in 
Fig. 10 contains videos of athletes practising 16 different sports, 
all obtained from YouTube. The dataset contains the following 
16 activities: High jump, long jump, triple jump, pole vault, dis- 
cus throw, hammer throw, javelin throw, shot put, basketball 
lay-up, bowling, tennis serve, platform diving, springboard div- 
ing, snatch (weightlifting), clean and jerk (weightlifting), gym- 
nastic vault. 

50 video sequences are collected for each activity. The data is 
annotated with the class label for each activity. 
The dataset is available for download from http://vision. 
stanford.edu/Datasets/OlympicSports/ . 
 S-HOCK dataset 
The S-HOCK dataset ( Conigliaro et al., 2015 ) focuses on the 
spectators during four hockey matches. 5 cameras are used 
as shown in Fig. 11 : 2 wide angle HD cameras for panoramic 
views, and three high resolution cameras focusing on different 
parts of the crowd. Three types of annotation are available: De- 
tection (localizing the body and the head), posture, and action 
annotation. A total of 13.965 frames and 1.950.210 people are 
annotated. 
The dataset is available for download from http://vips.sci.univr. 
it/dataset/shock/ . 
 Soccer Video and Player Position Dataset 
The Soccer Video and Player Position Dataset ( Pettersen et al., 
2014 ) is captured during three elite soccer matches. The player 
positions are measured at 20 Hz using the ZXY Sport Track- 
ing system, and the video is captured from the middle of the 
eld using two camera arrays. The player tracking system pro- 
vides the player coordinates on the eld, their speed, accelera- 
tion and force together with an ID and timestamp. The camera 
array covers the entire eld, and each camera can be used in- 
dividually or as a stitched panorama video. Two full matches 
(each 90 min) are available with video from three single cam- 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

13 

Fig. 10. Example frames from Olympic Sports Dataset ( Niebles et al., 2010 ). 

Fig. 11. Example frames from the ve views of the S-HOCK dataset ( Conigliaro et al., 2015 ). 

eras and a stitched panorama video. From the third match 
40 min panorama video is available; an example frame shown 
in Fig. 12 . For this sequence the ball position is annotated for a 
subset of frames. 
The dataset is available for download from http://home.i.uio. 
no/paalh/dataset/alfheim/ . 
 Sports Videos in the Wild 
Sports Videos in the Wild (SVW) ( Safdarnejad et al., 2015 ) is 
comprised of 4200 videos captured with smartphones by users 
of Coachs Eye smartphone app, an app for sports training de- 
veloped by TechSmith corporation. SVW includes 30 categories 
of sports and 44 different actions. The dataset is highly uncon- 
strained with amateur players and unprofessional capturing by 
amateur users of the app. Example frames from the dataset are 
shown in Fig. 13 . 



Each video is annotated with the sport genre. In addition, for 
40% of the video, the time span of each action and a bounding 
box showing the spatial extent of the action at the start and 
end frame of the action are also specied. 
The dataset is available for download from http://www.cse.msu. 
edu/ 
liuxm/sportsVideo/ . 
 Sports-1M Dataset 
The Sports-1M Dataset ( Karpathy et al., 2014 ) contains 1,133,158 
video URLs which have been annotated automatically with 487 
Sports labels using the YouTube Topics API. The classes are ar- 
ranged in a manually-curated taxonomy that contains internal 
nodes such as Aquatic Sports, Team Sports, Winter Sports, Ball 
Sports, Combat Sports, Sports with Animals, and generally be- 
comes ne-grained by the leaf level. For example, the dataset 
contains 6 different types of bowling, 7 different types of Amer- 

14 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Fig. 12. Example frame from the panoramic view of Soccer Video and Player Position dataset ( Pettersen et al., 2014 ). 

Fig. 13. Example frames from Sports Videos in the Wild dataset ( Safdarnejad et al., 2015 ). 

Fig. 14. Example frames from Sports-1M dataset ( Karpathy et al., 2014 ). 

ican football and 23 types of billiards. Example frames from the 
dataset are presented in Fig. 14 . There are 10 0 0每30 0 0 videos 
per class and approximately 5% of the videos are annotated 
with more than one class. Available in a JSON le is informa- 
tion on each sequence; Duration, resolution and label. 

The dataset is available for download from http://cs.stanford. 
edu/people/karpathy/deepvideo/ . 
 UCF Sports Action Dataset 
UCF Sports Action Dataset ( Rodriguez et al., 2008; Soomro and 
Zamir, 2014 ) consists of a set of actions collected from vari- 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

15 

Fig. 15. Example frames from UCF Sports Action dataset ( Rodriguez et al., 2008; Soomro and Zamir, 2014 ). 

Fig. 16. Example images from UIUC Sports Event dataset ( Li and Fei-Fei, 2007 ). 

ous sports which are typically featured on broadcast television 
channels such as the BBC and ESPN. The video sequences were 
obtained from a wide range of stock footage websites includ- 
ing BBC Motion gallery and GettyImages. The dataset contains 
the following 10 activities: Diving (14 videos), golf swing (18 
videos), kicking (20 videos), lifting (6 videos), riding horse (12 
videos), running (13 videos), skateboarding (12 videos), swing- 
bench (20 videos), swing-side (13 videos), walking (22 videos). 
Example frames are shown in Fig. 15 . 
The dataset includes a total of 150 sequences with the resolu- 
tion of 720 x 480 at 10 fps. Available annotations are bound- 
ing boxes for action localization and the class label for activ- 
ity recognition. Furthermore, human gaze annotations from 16 
viewers are available. 
The dataset is available for download from http://crcv.ucf.edu/ 
data/UCF _ Sports _ Action.php . 
 UIUC Sports Event Dataset 
This dataset ( Li and Fei-Fei, 2007 ) contains images from 8 
sports event categories shown in Fig. 16 : rowing (250 images), 
badminton (200 images), polo (182 images), bocce (137 im- 
ages), snowboarding (190 images), croquet (236 images), sail- 
ing (190 images), and rock climbing (194 images). The label is 

provided with each image. Images are divided into easy and 
medium according to the human subject judgement. Informa- 
tion of the distance of the foreground objects is also provided 
for each image as close, mid and far. 
The dataset is available for download from http://vision. 
stanford.edu/lijiali/event _ dataset/ . 
 UIUC2 
This dataset ( Tran and Sorokin, 2008 ) contains 3 video se- 
quences obtained from YouTube from the Badminton World 
Cup 2006: 1 single (3072 frames) and 2 double matches (1648 
and 3937 frames). An example frame from each sequence is 
shown in Fig. 17 . 1 sequence is annotated frame-by-frame with 
ve types of motion: Run, walk, hop, jump, and unknown, 
four types of shot: Forehand, backhand, smash, and unknown, 
and shot moment: Shot vs. non-shot. Furthermore, foreground 
masks and bounding boxes of the players are provided for all 
three sequences. 
The dataset is available for download from http://vision.cs.uiuc. 
edu/projects/activity/ . 
 Volleyball Activity Dataset 
This dataset ( Waltner et al., 2014 ) contains 6 video se- 
quences captured from games in the professional Austrian Vol- 

16 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Fig. 17. Example frames from UIUC2 badminton dataset ( Tran and Sorokin, 2008 ). 

Fig. 18. Example frames from Volleyball Activity Dataset ( Waltner et al., 2014 ). 

℅ 1080 
ley League. The videos have a high resolution of 1920 
pixels at 25 fps, example frames are shown in Fig. 18 . The 
dataset is annotated with bounding boxes and activity labels 
for each player, using seven possible activities: Serve, reception, 
setting, attack, block, stand, and defence/move. 
The dataset is available for download from http://lrs.icg.tugraz. 
at/download.php#vb14 . 

4. Summary 

This paper has highlighted some of the current uses for com- 
puter vision in sports, and discussed some of the current chal- 
lenges. 
There are now well-established commercial applications using 
technologies such as multi-camera ball tracking to provide in- 
depth data for coaching, helping the referee and providing analysis 
for TV viewers. Vision-based tracking systems for broadcast cam- 
eras allow overlays to be placed into the image. Player tracking 
applications for tactical analysis and coaching tend to rely on semi- 
automated approaches, with operators helping to initialise and cor- 
rect vision-based tracking systems. Analysis of the detailed move- 
ment of individual competitors still tends to require the use of 
marker-based motion capture systems, limiting these applications 
to high-end training scenarios. 
Detection and tracking of people or the ball as well as semantic 
scene understanding are still open research topics when it comes 
to sports especially for activities where physical interaction is an 
inherent part of the game. Compared to other detection, tracking 
and semantic scene understanding applications in computer vision, 
the world of sports analysis often introduces additional diculties 
like rapid and abrupt motion, similar appearance and frequent oc- 
clusions. On the other hand, sports applications often have built- 
in constraints that can make the problems more tractable. These 
are the physical constraints of the arenas where sports are being 
performed and the formal (and informal!) rules of each particular 
(part of a) game. A clear future direction for computer vision re- 
search in sports is therefore to enforce the constraints more closely 
on the different algorithms. Moreover, the combination of the dif- 

ferent topics (detection, tracking and semantics) is also a promis- 
ing avenue to follow. A good example of this is Bialkowski et al. 
(2014) , where it was shown that by rst detecting the semantics 
and then using that as prior could improve the tracking results. 
As seen in other computer vision subelds, the availability of 
public benchmarking datasets is very important. As illustrated in 
this paper a number of such datasets are already available, but 
many publications still present results evaluated only on their own 
datasets. With a continued focus on - and contribution to - pub- 
licly available datasets a more unied approach to this eld can be 
expected, helping to drive further advances. 

References 

Aldridge, D., 2013. SportVU Cameras Shift Focus of What＊s Possible with NBA 
Stats . http://www.nba.com/2013/news/features/david _ aldridge/11/11/morning- 
tip- sportvu- cameras- in- arenas- problems- with- nets- qa- with- paul- george/ . 
Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Anderson, S. , 2013. Forsgren helps revolutionize golf on TV with Protracer. Golf 
WRX . 
Atmosukarto, I. , Ghanem, B. , Saadalla, M. , Ahuja, N. , 2014. Recognizing team forma- 
tion in american football. In: Moeslund, T., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Com- 
puter Vision in Sports, chapter 13. Springer . 
Badminton, B., 2017. Hawk-eye to Determine ※In or Out§. BWF Badminton, 04 April, 
2014 http://bwfbadminton.com/2014/04/04/hawk- eye- to- determine- in- or- out/ . 
Accessed 26 Feb 2017. 
Behendi, S.K. , Morgan, S. , Fookes, C.B. , 2016. Non-invasive performance measure- 
ment in combat sports. In: Chung, P., Soltoggio, A., Dawson, W.C., Meng, Q., 
Pain, M. (Eds.), Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium on Computer 
Science in Sports (ISCSS). Springer International Publishing, pp. 3每10 . 
Bialik, C. , 2014. The people tracking every touch, pass and tackle in the world cup. 
Five-Thirty-Eight . 
Bialkowski, A. , Lucey, P. , Carr, P. , Sridharan, S. , Matthews, I. , 2014. Representing team 
behaviours from noisy data using player role. In: Moeslund, T., Thomas, G., 
Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports, chapter 12. Springer . 
Boril, H. , Sangwan, A. , Hasan, T. , Hansen, J.H.L. , 2010. Automatic excitement-level 
detection for sports highlights generation. In: 11th Annual Conference of the 
International Speech Communication Association (INTERSPEECH) . 
Broussard, C., 2017. Pro Basketball; N.B.A. will Use Replay to Review Buzzer 
Shots . The New York Times. July 30, 2002. http://www.nytimes.com/2002/07/ 
30/sports/pro- basketball- nba- will- use- replay- to- review- buzzer- shots.html . Ac- 
cessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Chakraborty, B. , Meher, S. , 2012. Real-time position estimation and tracking of a 
basketball. In: IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Computing 
and Control . 
Chakraborty, B. , Meher, S. , 2013. A real-time trajectory-based ball detection-and每
tracking framework for basketball video. J. Opt. 42 (2), 156每170 . 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

17 

Chang, Y. , Maheswaran, R. , Su, J. , Kwok, S. , Levy, T. , Wexler, A. , Squire, K. , 2014. 
Quantifying shot quality in the NBA. In: MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference . 
Chen, F. , Delannay, D. , Vleeschouwer, C.D. , 2011. An autonomous framework to pro- 
duce and distribute personalized team-sport video summaries: a basketball case 
study. IEEE Trans. Multim. 13 (6), 1381每1394 . 
Chen, H. , Tien, M. , Chen, Y. , Tsai, W. , Lee, S. , 2009. Physics-based ball tracking and 
3d trajectory reconstruction with applications to shooting location estimation 
in basketball video. J. Vis. Commun. Image Represent. 20 (3), 204每216 . 
ChyronHego, 2017a. 5 Reasons You Need TRACAB Player Tracking . http://chyronhego. 
com/sports- data/tracab . Accessed 12th Feb 2017. 
ChyronHego, 2017b. Product Information Sheet TRACAB Optical Tracking . http:// 
chyronhego.com/sports- data/tracab . Accessed 12th Feb 2017. 
Cole, B. , 2014. Making sense of the video tracking systems. Beyond the Box Score . 
Conigliaro, D. , Rota, P. , Setti, F. , Bassetti, C. , Conci, N. , Sebe, N. , Cristani, M. , 2015. 
The s-hock dataset: analyzing crowds at the stadium. In: The IEEE Conference 
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 
Dawes, R. , Chandaria, J. , Thomas, G. , 2009. Image-based camera tracking for athlet- 
ics. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Mul- 
timedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB 2009) Available as BBC R&D White 
Paper 181 . 
D＊Orazio, T. , Leo, M. , Mosca, N. , Spagnolo, P. , Mazzeo, P.L. , 2009. A semi-automatic 
system for ground truth generation of soccer video sequences. In: IEEE Interna- 
tional Conference on Advanced Video and Signal Surveillance (AVSS) . 
Ekin, A . , Tekalp, A .M. , Mehrotra, R. , 2003. Automatic soccer video analysis and sum- 
marization. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 12 (7), 796每807 . 
EPFL, 2016. Tracking Multiple People in a Multi-Camera Environment . http://cvlab. 
ep.ch/research/body/surv . Accessed 7th July 2016. 
Ericsson, 2016. The Piero 
TM Sports Graphics System . http://www.ericsson.com/ 
broadcastandmedia/what- we- do/piero . Accessed 2 May 2016. 
Stack Exchange, S., 2017. Why is FIFA Against Adding Instant Replay to 
the Game? . http://sports.stackexchange.com/questions/179/why- is- fa- against- 
adding- instant- replay- to- the- game . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Fast, M. , 2010. What the heck is pitchf/x? The Hardball Times Baseball Annual ACTA 
Publications . 
Faulkner, H. , Dick, A. , 2015. AFL player detection and tracking. In: International Con- 
ference on Digital Image Computing: Techniques and Applications (DICTA) . 
Fetters, A., 2012. How Instant Replays Changed Professional Tennis . The At- 
lantic, Sep 7, 2012. https://www.theatlantic.com/entertainment/archive/2012/ 
09/how- instant- replays- changed- professional- tennis/262060/ . Accessed 12 Feb 
2017. 
FIFA, 2016a. FIFA Certied GLT Installations . http://quality.fa.com/en/ 
Goal- Line- Technology/FIFA- certied- GLT- installations . Accessed 10 May 2016. 
FIFA, 2014. FIFA Quality Programme for Goal-Line Technology - Testing Man- 
ual 
2014 . 
http://quality.fa.com/en/Goal- Line- Technology/Get- to- know- 
goal- line- technology/See- how- it- is- tested/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
FIFA, 2016c. Goal-line Technology Set Up Ahead of FIFA World Cup . 
http://www.fa.com/worldcup/news/y=2014/m=4/news=goal- line- technology- 
set- ahead- fa- world- cup- 2311481.html . Accessed 7th July 2016. 
Figueroa, P.J. , Leite, N.J. , Barros, R.M.L. , 2006. Tracking soccer players aiming their 
kinematical motion analysis. Comput. Vision Image Understanding 101, 122每135 . 
Fu, T.S. , Chen, H.T. , Chou, C.L. , Tsai, W.J. , Lee, S.Y. , 2011. Screen-strategy analysis in 
broadcast basketball video using player tracking. In: IEEE Visual Communica- 
tions and Image Processing (VCIP), pp. 1每4 . 
Gade, R. , Moeslund, T.B. , 2014. Classication of sports types using thermal imagery. 
In: Moeslund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports. 
Springer . chapter 10. 
Gade, R. , rgensen, A.J. , Moeslund, T.B. , 2012. Occupancy analysis of sports arenas us- 
ing thermal imaging. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on Com- 
puter Vision Theory and Applications . 
Gerke, S. , M邦ller, K. , Schfer, R. , 2015. Soccer jersey number recognition using con- 
volutional neural networks. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer Vi- 
sion Workshop (ICCVW) . 
Gilligan, J., 2014. How GPS Technology is Changing Rugby . SportTechie, May 
19, 
2014 
http://www.sporttechie.com/2014/05/19/uncategorized/how- gps- 
technology- is- changing- rugby/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Grau, O. , Price, M. , Thomas, G. , 2001. Use of 3-D techniques for virtual production. 
In: SPIE Conference on Videometrics and Optical Methods for 3D Shape Mea- 
surement . 
Haimovitch, O., 2015. System and Method of Limiting Processing by a 3d Recon- 
struction System of an Environment in a 3d Reconstruction of an Event Occur- 
ring in an Event Space. US Patent application US2016189421. 
Halbinger, J. , Metzler, J. , 2015. Video-based soccer ball detection in dicult situ- 
ations. Communications in Computer and Information Science. Sports Science 
Research and Technology Support: International Congress, 464 . 
Hall, A. , 2014. ESPN emerging technologies enhancement of golf visuals displayed at 
open championship. ESPN Front Row . 
Hanjalic, A. , 2005. Adaptive extraction of highlights from a sport video based on 
excitement modeling. IEEE Trans. Multimedia. 7 (6), 1114每1122 . 
IIS, F., 2016. Goalref 
TM Goal Detection System . http://www.iis.fraunhofer.de/en/ff/ 
kom/proj/goalref.html . Accessed 7th July 2016. 
Innovations, H.-E., 2017a. Hawk-Eye Electronic Line Calling . http://www. 
hawkeyeinnovations.co.uk/products/ball- tracking/electronic- line- calling . 
Ac- 
cessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Innovations, H.-E., 2017b. Hawk-Eye Goal Line Technology . http://www. 
hawkeyeinnovations.co.uk/products/ball- tracking/goal- line- technology . 
Ac- 
cessed 12 Feb 2017. 

http://www. 

Innovations, H.-E., 2017c. Hawk-Eye in Cricket . http://www.hawkeyeinnovations.co. 
uk./sports/cricket . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Innovations, H.-E., 
2017d. Hawk-Eye 
Tennis 
System . 
hawkeyeinnovations.co.uk/sports/tennis . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Innovations, H.-E., 2017e. Paul Hawkins Response to ESPN CricInfo Blog ※Why 
Ball-Tracking can＊t be Trusted§. http://www.hawkeyeinnovations.co.uk./sports/ 
cricket . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Ivankovic, Z. , Markoski, B. , Ivkovic, M. , Radosav, D. , Pecev, P. , 2012. Adaboost in bas- 
ketball player identication. IEEE 13th International Symposium on Computa- 
tional Intelligence and Informatics . 
Johnson, S. , Everingham, M. , 2010. Clustered pose and nonlinear appearance models 
for human pose estimation. In: Proceedings of the 21st British Machine Vision 
Conference (BMVC) . 
Kapela, R. , McGuinness, K. , Swietlicka, A. , O＊Connor, N.E. , 2014. Real-time event de- 
tection in eld sport videos. In: Moeslund, T., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Com- 
puter Vision in Sports, chapter 14. Springer . 
Karpathy, A. , Toderici, G. , Shetty, S. , Leung, T. , Sukthankar, R. , Fei-Fei, L. , 2014. 
Large-scale video classication with convolutional neural networks. In: IEEE In- 
ternational Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 
Kasuya, N. , Kitahara, I. , Kameda, Y. , Ohta, Y. , 2008. Robust trajectory estimation of 
soccer players by using two cameras. In: 19th International Conference on Pat- 
tern Recognition . 
Kolekar, M.H. , Sengupta, S. , 2015. Bayesian network-based customized highlight gen- 
eration for broadcast soccer videos. IEEE Trans. Broadcast. 61 (2), 195每209 . 
Krishna Mohan, C. , Yegnanarayana, B. , 2010. Classication of sport videos using 
edge-based features and autoassociative neural network models. Signal Image 
Video Process. 4, 61每73 . 
Kristan, M. , Pers, J. , Perse, M. , Kovacic, S. , 2009. Closed-world tracking of multiple 
interacting targets for indoor-sports applications. Comput. Vision Image Under- 
stand. 113 (5), 598每611 . 
Lee, J.Y., Hoff, W., 2007. Activity identication utilizing data mining techniques. IEEE 
Workshop on Motion and Video Computing (WMVC) doi: 10.1109/WMVC.2007.4 . 
Leo, M. , Mosca, N. , Spagnolo, P. , Mazzeo, P. , D＊Orazio, T. , Distante, A. , 2008. Real-time 
multiview analysis of soccer matches for understanding interactions between 
ball and players. In: Conference on Image and Video Retrieval . 
Leung, D., 2017. NBA Teams Banned from using Wearables Data in Contract Ne- 
gotiations, Player Transactions . SportTechie, January 31, 2017 http://www. 
sporttechie.com/2017/01/31/sports/nba/nba- teams- banned- using- wearables- 
data- contract- negotiations- player- transactions/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Li, L. , Fei-Fei, L. , 2007. What, where and who? Classifying event by scene and object 
recognition. In: IEEE International Conference in Computer Vision (ICCV) . 
Liu, J. , Carr, P. , 2014. Detecting and tracking sports players with random forests and 
context-conditioned motion models. In: Moeslund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. 
(Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports. Springer . chapter 6. 
Lowe, Z. , 2013. Lights, cameras, revolution. Grantland . 
Lu, W. , Ting, J. , Murphy, K.P. , Little, J.J. , 2011. Identifying players in broadcast sports 
videos using conditional random elds. In: IEEE International Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 
Maksai, A. , Wang, X. , Fua, P. , 2016. What players do with the ball: A physically con- 
strained interaction modeling. In: IEEE International Conference on Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 
Manafard, M. , Ebadi, H. , Moghaddam, H.A. , 2016. A survey on player tracking in 
soccer videos. Submitted for Computer Vision and Image Understanding, Special 
Issue on Computer Vision in Sports . 
McQueen, A. , Wiens, J. , Guttag, J. , 2014. Automatically recognizing on-ball screens. 
In: MIT Sloan Sports Analytics Conference . 
McSurley, K. , Rybarczyk, G. , 2011. An Introduction to FIELDf/x. The Hardball Times 
Baseball Annual ACTA Publications . 
Mo-Sys, 2016. Red Bull Air Race with Gyrotracker . http://www.mo- sys.com/news/ 
red- bull- air- race- gyrotracker . Accessed 15 May 2016. 
Mutchima, P., Sanguansat, P., 2012. TF-RNF: a novel term weighting scheme for 
sports video classication. In: IEEE International Conference on Signal Process- 
ing, Communication and Computing (ICSPCC) doi: 10.1109/ICSPCC.2012.6335651 . 
Nguyen, N. , Yoshitaka, A. , 2014. Soccer video summarization based on cinematogra- 
phy and motion analysis. In: IEEE 16th International Workshop on Multimedia 
Signal Processing (MMSP), pp. 1每6 . 
Niebles, J.C. , Chen, C. , Fei-Fei, L. , 2010. Modeling temporal structure of decompos- 
able motion segments for activity classication. In: 11th European Conference 
on Computer Vision (ECCV) . 
Orad, 2016. Trackvision First Down Line System . http://www.orad.tv/product/sports/ 
fdl . Accessed 11 May 2016. 
Owens, N. , Harris, C. , Stennett, C. , 2003. Hawk-eye tennis system. In: International 
Conference on Visual Information Engineering (VIE2003), pp. 182每185 . 
Pers, J., Bon, M., Vuckovic, G., 2006. Cvbase ＊06 Dataset . http://vision.fe.uni- lj.si/ 
cvbase06/downloads.html . 
Perse, M. , Kristan, M. , Kovacic, S. , Vuckovic, G. , Pers, J. , 2009. A trajectory-based 
analysis of coordinated team activity in a basketball game. Comput. Vision Im- 
age Understand. 113 (5), 612每621 . Computer Vision Based Analysis in Sport En- 
vironments. 
Petrovic, K., 2017. Intel 360-degree Replay Technology Brings Basketball Fans 
into the Future . https://iq.intel.com/360- degree- replay- technology- brings- 
fans- into- the- future- of- sports/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Pettersen, S.A. , Johansen, D. , Johansen, H. , Berg-Johansen, V. , Gaddam, V.R. , 
Mortensen, A. , Langseth, R. , Griwodz, C. , Stensland, H.K. , Halvorsen, P. , 2014. 
Soccer video and player position dataset. In: Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Multimedia Systems (MMSys) . 

18 

G. Thomas et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 159 (2017) 3每18 

Popa, T. , Germann, M. , Ziegler, R. , Keiser, R. , Gross, M. , 2014. Geometry reconstruc- 
tion of players for novel-view synthesis of sports broadcasts. In: Moeslund, T.B., 
Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports. Springer . chapter 7. 
Prandoni, P., 2003. Automated Stroboscoping of Video Sequences. European Patent 
Specication EP 1287. 
Rao, M.U. , Pati, U.C. , 2015. A novel algorithm for detection of soccer ball and player. 
In: International Conference on Communications and Signal Processing . 
R&D, B., 2017. Piero Sports Graphics System . http://www.bbc.co.uk/rd/projects/piero . 
Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Ren, J. , Orwell, J. , Jones, G.A. , Xu, M. , 2009. Tracking the soccer ball using multiple 
xed cameras. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 113 (5), 633每642 . 
Reno, V. , Mosca, N. , Nitti, M. , D＊Orazio, T. , Campagnoli, D. , Prati, A. , Stella, E. , 2015. 
Tennis player segmentation for semantic behavior analysis. In: IEEE Interna- 
tional Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW) . 
Reusens, M., Vetterli, M., Ayer, S., Bergnozoli, V., 2007. Coordination and Combi- 
nation of Video Sequences with Spatial and Temporal Normalization. European 
Patent Specication EP 4, 2007. 
Rodriguez, M.D. , Ahmed, J. , Shah, M. , 2008. Action mach: a spatio-temporal maxi- 
mum average correlation height lter for action recognition. In: IEEE Interna- 
tional Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 
Safdarnejad, S.M. , Liu, X. , Udpa, L. , Andrus, B. , Wood, J. , Craven, D. , 2015. Sports 
videos in the wild (svw): a video dataset for sports analysis. In: 11th IEEE Int. 
Conf. Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition . 
Soomro, K. , Khokhar, S. , Shah, M. , 2015. Tracking when the camera looks away. In: 
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW) . 
Soomro, K. , Zamir, A.R. , 2014. Action recognition in realistic sports videos. In: Moes- 
lund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports. Springer . 
chapter 9. 
de Sousa, S.F. , de A. Arajo, A. , Menotti, D. , 2011. An overview of automatic event 
detection in soccer matches. In: IEEE Workshop on Applications of Computer 
Vision (WACV), pp. 31每38 . 
Sportvision, 2016a . https://www.sportvision.com/football/1st- ten- system . Accessed 
11 May 2016. 
Sportvision, 2016b. Liveline . http://www.sportvision.com/sailing/liveline . Accessed 
15 May 2016. 
STATS, 2017. STATS SportVU : Player Tracking and Predictive Analytics . https:// 
www.stats.com/publications/stats- sportvu- player- tracking- advanced- analytics/ . 
Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Storey, R. , 1984. TELETRACK - A Special Effect . BBC Research Department Report 
1984-10, Available as BBC R&D White Paper 033. 
Takahashi, D., 
2017. 
Those 
Super 
Bowl 
Instant 
Replays 
You＊ll 
Love 
Run 
off
Intels 
Tech . 
http://venturebeat.com/2016/02/06/ 
super- bowls- eyevision- instant- replays- from- any- angle- are- powered- by- intel/ . 
Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Tamaki, S. , Saito, H. , 2014. Plane approximation-based approach for 3d recon- 
struction of ball trajectory for performance analysis in table tennis. In: Moes- 
lund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports, chapter 3. 
Springer . 
Tamir, M. , Oz, G. , 2008. Real-Time Objects Tracking and Motion Capture in Sports 
Events . US Patent App. 11/909,080. 
Technologies, R., 2017. Freed 
TM Free Dimensional Video . http://replay- technologies. 
com/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 

Thomas, G. , 2007. Real-time camera tracking using sports pitch markings. J. Real 
Time Image Processing 2, 2每3 . 
Tran, D. , Sorokin, A. , 2008. Human Activity Recognition with Metric Learning. In: 
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) . 
UEFA, 2016. Uefa Euro 2016 to Use Hawk-Eye for Goal-Line Technology . http://www. 
uefa.org/mediaservices/mediareleases/newsid=2354960.html . Accessed 7th July 
2016. 
Mellon University, C., 2017. Carnegie Mellon goes to the Super Bowl . https://www. 
ri.cmu.edu/events/sb35/tksuperbowl.html . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Vizrt, 2016 . http://www.vizrt.com/products/viz _ libero/ . Accessed 11 May 2016. 
Vleeschouwer, C.D. , Chen, F. , Delannay, D. , Parisot, C. , Chaudy, C. , Martrou, E. , Caval- 
laro, A. , 2008. Distributed video acquisition and annotation for sport-event sum- 
marization. NEM Summit: Towards Future Media Internet . 
Waltner, G. , Mauthner, T. , Bischof, H. , 2014. Indoor activity detection and recognition 
for automated sport games analysis. In: Austrian Conference on Pattern Recog- 
nition (AAPR/OAGM) . 
Wang, X. , Turetken, E. , Fleuret, F. , Fua, P. , 2014. Tracking interacting objects opti- 
mally using integer programming. In: European Conference on Computer Vision 
(ECCV) . 
Wang, X. , Turetken, E. , Fleuret, F. , Fua, P. , 2016. Tracking interacting objects using 
intertwined ows. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli- 
gence . 
Wei, X. , Sha, L. , Lucey, P. , Carr, P. , Sridharan, S. , Matthews, I. , 2015. Predicting ball 
ownership in basketball from a monocular view using only player trajectories. 
In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (ICCVW), 
pp. 780每787 . 
Wilson, S. , Mohan, C.K. , Murthy, K.S. , 2014. Event-based sports videos classication 
using HMM framework. In: Moeslund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Com- 
puter Vision in Sports, chapter 11. Springer . 
Wolverton, T., 2017. Big Data Meets Big-Time Basketball . http://www.mercurynews. 
com/2014/05/17/big- data- meets- big- time- basketball/ . Accessed 12 Feb 2017. 
Wu, L. , Meng, X. , Liu, X. , Chen, S. , 2006. A new method of object segmentation in 
the basketball videos. In: 18th International Conference on Pattern Recognition 
(ICPR) . 
Xiao, J. , Stolkin, R. , Leonardis, A. , 2014. Multi-target tracking in team-sports videos 
via multi-level context-conditioned latent behaviour models. In: British Ma- 
chine Vision Conference (BMVC) . 
Xu, M. , Orwell, J. , Jones, G. , 2004. Tracking football players with multiple cameras. 
In: International Conference on Image Processing . 
Yan, F. , Christmas, W. , Kittler, J. , 2014. Ball tracking for tennis video annotation. 
In: Moeslund, T.B., Thomas, G., Hilton, A. (Eds.), Computer Vision in Sports. 
Springer, Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . chapter 2. 
Ye, Q. , Huang, Q. , Jiang, S. , Liu, Y. , Gao, W. , 2005. Jersey number detection in sports 
video for athlete identication. Visual Commun. Image Process. Proc. SPIE 5960 . 
Yuan, Y., Wan, C., 2004. The application of edge feature in automatic sports genre 
classication. In: IEEE Conference on Cybernetics and Intelligent Systems doi: 10. 
1109/ICCIS.2004.1460749 . 
Zawbaa, H.M. , El-Bendary, N. , Hassanien, A.E. , Abraham, A. , 2011. Svm-based soccer 
video summarization system. In: Third World Congress on Nature and Biologi- 
cally Inspired Computing (NaBIC), pp. 7每11 . 
Zhang, T. , Ghanem, B. , Ahuja, N. , 2012. Robust multi-object tracking via cross-do- 
main contextual information for sports video analysis. In: IEEE International 
Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing . 

