Computer vision techniques for construction safety and health monitoring 

JoonOh Seo a, SangUk Han b, SangHyun Lee a,
, Hyoungkwan Kim c

a Tishman Construction Management Program, Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Michigan, 2350 Hayward St., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
b Dept. of Civil and Environmental Engineering, University of Alberta, 9105 116th St., Edmonton, Alberta T6G 2W2, Canada
c School of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Yonsei University, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 120-749, Republic of Korea

article
info

Article history:
Received 23 September 2014
Received in revised form 2 January 2015
Accepted 3 February 2015
Available online 21 February 2015

Keywords:
Construction safety and health
Computer vision
Monitoring


abstract

For construction safety and health, continuous monitoring of unsafe conditions and action is essential in
order to eliminate potential hazards in a timely manner. As a robust and automated means of eld obser-
vation, computer vision techniques have been applied for the extraction of safety related information
from site images and videos, and regarded as effective solutions complementary to current time-consum-
ing and unreliable manual observational practices. Although some research efforts have been directed
toward computer vision-based safety and health monitoring, its application in real practice remains pre-
mature due to a number of technical issues and research challenges in terms of reliability, accuracy, and
applicability. This paper thus reviews previous attempts in construction applications from both technical
and practical perspectives in order to understand the current status of computer vision techniques, which
in turn suggests the direction of future research in the eld of computer vision-based safety and health
monitoring. Specically, this paper categorizes previous studies into three groups〞object detection,
object tracking, and action recognition〞based on types of information required to evaluate unsafe con-
ditions and acts. The results demonstrate that major research challenges include comprehensive scene
understanding, varying tracking accuracy by camera position, and action recognition of multiple equip-
ment and workers. In addition, we identied several practical issues including a lack of task-specic and
quantiable metrics to evaluate the extracted information in safety context, technical obstacles due to
dynamic conditions at construction sites and privacy issues. These challenges indicate a need for further
research in these areas. Accordingly, this paper provides researchers insights into advancing knowledge
and techniques for computer vision-based safety and health monitoring, and offers fresh opportunities
and considerations to practitioners in understanding and adopting the techniques.
 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Due to hazardous working environments at construction sites,
workers frequently face potential safety and health risks through-
out the construction process. Even though the construction sector
constitutes about 5% of the workforce in the U.S., fatal injuries in
construction account for about 18% of all occupational deaths [1].
In addition, the incident rate for nonfatal occupational injuries
and illness in construction is 30% higher than average industries
[2]. These statistics obviously show an immediate need to reduce
the prevalence of fatal and non-fatal injuries in construction. To
address this issue, previous research has examined accident occur-
rence mechanisms to understand the causes of accidents, and the
process and conditions leading to accidents. Notably, prior work
demonstrates that nearly all such injuries are highly preventable
by reducing or eliminating exposures that may contribute to detri-
mental safety and health effects to construction workers [3,4].
In the accident causation model [5], unsafe conditions and
unsafe acts are considered the two direct causes of accidents.
Monitoring unsafe conditions and acts in the construction process
thus plays a key role in determining and taking prompt corrective
actions to prevent resulting safety and health issues by eliminating
them in the causal process. In practice, site observations and
inspections are commonly used techniques to evaluate the risk
involved in ongoing works and existing site conditions in construc-
tion [6]. However, observational methods are costly and time-
consuming because they require human manual observations
and documentations by supervisors or safety personnel [7]. In
addition, manual observation suffers from the limitations of miss-
ing and inaccurate information in a timely fashion [8]. These
limitations become more signicant in construction projects
because worker environments continuously change over time
and skilled supervisory manpower is not always present at sites,
thereby making it challenging to implement manual observation
processes in daily practice [9].
Recently, computer vision has drawn attention because it can
be used for the automated and continuous monitoring at construc-
tion sites. Computer vision can provide a rich set of information
(e.g., locations and behaviors of project entities, and site condi-
tions) about a construction scene by taking images or videos,
which facilitates the understanding of the complex construction
tasks rapidly, accurately, and comprehensively. These advances
bring the operational and technical advantages over other types
of sensing techniques (e.g., RFID, GPS and UWB) that require instal-
lation of sensors to all of project entities to be monitored and pro-
vide limited information such as location data, providing an
opportunity to complement them [10,13,23,44,45,79]. Accordingly,
computer vision has been applied to various areas in construction
such as progress monitoring, productivity analysis, defect detec-
tion, and automated documentation [8,11,12,14]. Computer vision
technologies have also great potential as eld-based safety and
health monitoring tools that can address limitations of current
manual observational approaches, creating opportunities to auto-
mate the risk identication and evaluation processes by extracting
and analyzing relevant
information from images or videos
[10,14,15]. Despite recent progress made toward computer
vision-based approaches to safety and health monitoring, prior
works have been infrequently applied to actual practice for techni-
cal and practical issues, or any other issues. Further studies are
thus required to nd out existing limitations and issues in the cur-
rent body of knowledge in order to boost the adoption of the
advanced techniques by practitioners as well as to address the
identied issues in the future studies.
This paper reviews existing literature in computer vision-based
safety and health monitoring: (1) to understand the existing state-
of-the-art methods and their current progress; (2) to identify the
major challenges and limitations commonly found in the prior
studies; and (3) to offer potential problem-solving directions for
future studies. To provide an overview on this review, this paper
rst presents current safety management practices relevant to eld
monitoring, and discusses potential roles and the general frame-
work of computer vision for safety observation and inspections.
We then present overall concepts, specic methods and applica-
tions of computer vision techniques that are directly or potentially
used for safety and health monitoring in construction, specically
in the three groups categorized by computer vision methods and
types of information extracted from imagery data (namely, object
detection, object tracking and action recognition). Along with the
overall review, this paper discusses technical challenges and
potential issues when applying computer vision-based approaches
in practice.

2. Overview of computer vision for safety and health
monitoring

Compared with other
industries such as automotive or
manufacturing industries [62,63], the construction industry has
many domain-specic issues in safety and health monitoring such
as continuously changing and complex working environments, and
non-standardized work procedures and designs, which may result
in challenges for computer vision-based safety and health monitor-
ing. In this section, current practices of safety and health monitor-
ing in construction, and potential roles and approaches of

computer vision to improve the practices are presented. Based on
the potential roles, a general framework for computer vision-based
safety and health monitoring is suggested.

2.1. Current practices of safety and health monitoring

The unique, dynamic, and complex nature of construction pro-
jects likely increases workers＊ exposure to hazardous working
environments. Occupational hazards cannot be fully eliminated
without systematic and comprehensive efforts for managing safety
and health on construction worksites such as safety planning,
worksite analysis, hazard prevention, and control or safety and
health training [4]. The purpose of safety and health monitoring
is to make sure that safety and health are being effectively man-
aged by measuring health and safety practice against an organiza-
tion＊s safety and health plans and standards.
Among safety and health monitoring activities, job safety obser-
vations and inspections are one of the common techniques used to
evaluate ongoing tasks in construction [4]. The jobsite observation
and inspection is typically conducted on a weekly or bi-weekly
basis depending on the size of the project, and inspectors generally
take the observation〞without any other tasks at the time〞for one
to two hours at a randomly scheduled time during the week [16].
During the observation, the human observer then serves to detect
and eliminate the potential causes (i.e., unsafe conditions and acts)
of accidents by watching workers perform a specic task (i.e., safe-
ty observation) or visually examining the work area and work
equipment (i.e., safety inspection) with a checklist [4]. To simplify
the record keeping, for example, Reese and Eidson [4] identied
unsafe conditions and acts that contribute to injury, property dam-
age, or equipment failure, such as failure to wear personal protec-
tive equipment (PPE), improper lifting, improper use of equipment
(e.g., excessive speeds, servicing moving equipment) or improperly
stored explosive or hazardous materials.

2.2. Potential roles of computer vision-based approaches

As described in an earlier section, identication of risks such as
unsafe conditions and acts calls upon observers＊ perceptual and
cognitive capabilities [94]. For example, observers have to under-
stand scenes using their perceptual capability such as object and
scene recognition, or visual processing of spatial and temporal
relations. Then, the perceptual information should be evaluated
by comparing it with rules, guidelines, or observers＊ past experi-
ences to identify unsafe conditions and acts. However, computer
vision techniques themselves that aims to perform visual tasks
accurately and reliably [17] are limited only to extract the percep-
tual information, not addressing evaluation of the information to
identify unsafe conditions and acts. Therefore, computer vision-
based approaches for safety and health monitoring should consider
not only how to extract perceptual information, but also how to
compare the information with existing knowledge on potential
risks or hazards.
Types of perceptual information for safety and health monitoring
vary depending on characteristics of unsafe conditions and acts,
which requires different computer vision techniques. Based on the
type of information, this paper classies computer vision-based
approaches into three categories: (1) scene-based; (2) location-
based; and (3) action-based risk identication (Table 1). First, the
scene-based approach pertains to understanding and evaluating
any potential risk in a static scene by inspecting the scene in a safety
context. For instance, required information for analysis includes
whether unsafe objects are present in the scene, safety tools and
equipment required are not present, workers are in unsafe areas,
and so on. In Table 1, failure to wear PPE (e.g., safety vests and hard
hats), congested work area, or improperly stored explosive or

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

241

Table 1
Potential roles of computer vision techniques for identifying unsafe conditions and acts.

Approaches

Descriptions

Examples of targeted unsafe acts and conditions

Scene-based risk
identication

Identify unsafe acts and conditions by
understanding
static scenes at construction sites

Failure to wear personal protective
equipment (PPE)

Location-based risk
identication

Identify unsafe acts based on locations and
movements
of project entities (e.g., equipment, workers)

Action-based risk
identication

Identify violation of safety and health rules
regarding motions

Congested work areas
Improperly stored explosive or hazardous materials, etc.

Failure to warn coworkers against being struck by
vehicles or equipment

Improper working position
Operating or working at unsafe speed etc.

Improper movements of superstructure of heavy
equipment
Improper lifting with awkward postures, etc.

Computer vision
techniques applied

Object detection

Object tracking

Action recognition

hazardous materials are examples of such unsafe acts and condi-
tions. For these types of unsafe conditions and acts, object detection
techniques have been applied in construction for the extraction of
relevant information [18,43,46,47,49,61]. Object detection herein
refers to the technique that detects a semantic object of interest in
an image by searching the image with the known object model
(e.g., appearance features). Therefore, object detection methods
allow for assessing absence of PPE on workers by detecting the
PPE and workers, or identifying unsafe conditions similarly by
detecting hazardous materials at undesignated or known unsafe
areas [14,18]. Second, the location-based approach is taken to eval-
uate the risk in the scene based on geometry information of project
entities (e.g., equipment and workers) moving around over time.
This type of information is essential to identify unsafe conditions
and acts such as improper working position (e.g., close proximity
between equipment or equipment and workers) or improper use
of equipment (e.g., excessive speed of equipment). To gather the
location information from images, previous research efforts in con-
struction have applied object tracking techniques for tracking the
trajectories of an object in a sequence of images by detecting the
object on frame-by-frame basis [10,19每21]. At construction sites,
construction workers and equipment continuously move over time
to perform tasks, which may inadvertently cause accidents or inju-
ries when workers or equipment operators fail to recognize the
other workers or equipment present nearby. The location-based
approach thus enables identifying interactions where the trajecto-
ries of workers and equipment frequently overlap; by anticipating
potential sites of accidents, the location-bases approach allows
managers to plan tasks properly (e.g., alarming dangerous situa-
tions and assigning a agman or arranging the tasks at different
time). Lastly, action-based risk identication focuses on the

detection of unsafe action by equipment or workers at specic posi-
tions. For example, an improperly revolving superstructure of the
excavator in congested areas is a common cause of struck-by-acci-
dents [22]. In addition, unsafe actions by workers (e.g., improper
lifting with awkward postures in Table 1) can cause ergonomic inju-
ries (e.g., musculoskeletal disorders) which account for 24% of non-
fatal occupational injuries and illnesses in construction in 2011 [2].
Motion information thus plays a critical role in evaluating ongoing
works performed by equipment and workers, generally with exist-
ing safety and health rules (e.g., checklists). As a means to collect
motion information on a jobsite, action recognition techniques that
capture particular actions in sequential images have been studied in
construction [24每29].

2.3. General framework for computer vision-based safety and health
monitoring

Based on diverse approaches discussed above, we derived a
general framework for computer vision-based safety and health
monitoring as shown in Fig. 1. Computer vision-based approaches
start from acquisition of imagery data on scene using various
image sensing devices. To extract useful information for safety
and health monitoring, the imagery data should be computational-
ly analyzed using diverse computer vision techniques, which can
be categorized into three elements according to types of informa-
tion extracted from collected images or videos: (1) object detec-
tion; (2) object tracking; and (3) action recognition, as discussed
in an earlier section.
Object detection serves as a method for scene-based risk iden-
tication, as well as a preliminary step for object tracking, and
action recognition. Once project entities of interest are recognized

Fig. 1. General framework for computer vision-based safety and health monitoring.

242

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

on a scene, their locations in 2D or 3D spaces can be tracked using
object tracking algorithms from sequential images in the course of
time. The location information extracted is used for location-based
identication of unsafe conditions and acts. When the project enti-
ties (e.g., workers and equipment) with articulated body structures
perform construction tasks, action recognition techniques are
required to determine what a worker or equipment is doing from
static or sequential images, and to identify unsafe acts that violate
safety and health rules. Each category of computer vision tech-
niques described here is a broad topic in the computer vision com-
munity, and many applications of the techniques have been
studied in construction. A detailed review of current advances in
each category will be described in the next section.

3. Computer vision-based approaches for construction safety
and health monitoring

Based on literature review, this section provides detailed
reviews on concepts, specic techniques, and applications of com-
puter vision techniques in construction. Despite the current pro-
gress of computer vision studies in construction, studies in safety
and health monitoring are still premature to be applied in real
practice. While a large portion of studies have focused on data col-
lection that can be used for multiple purposes such as performance
monitoring including productivity analysis as well as safety and
health monitoring, they fail to fully specify how to evaluate the
data for detecting unsafe conditions and acts. However, as accurate
and reliable data collection is also a necessary condition for safety
and health monitoring, this paper reviews previous research efforts
both on computer vision techniques that can be both directly and
potentially used to collect required eld data from images, and
their applications on safety and health monitoring. In this section,
rst, we introduce diverse image sensing devices that are currently
available for safety and health monitoring. Then, technical aspects,
research challenges, and future direction of diverse computer
vision approaches (i.e., object detection, object tracking and action
recognition) are described. Table 2 presents an overview of previ-
ous research efforts to be reviewed in this section.

3.1. Imagery data collection

Computer vision-based safety and health monitoring requires
images or videos on scenes where the construction task to be mon-
itored is taking place. In construction, video cameras have been
widely applied to observe and document construction activities
on construction sites, and to provide project managers a live image
of remote projects [30]. In addition, video surveillance systems
using stationary or pan-tile-zoom cameras are common in con-
struction for security issues such as accidents, vandalism, and the
theft of materials [31]. These cameras can be inexpensive solutions
to obtain 2D imagery data (i.e., 2D videos or sequential images)
required for computer vision-based monitoring.
Recently, due to increased availability of new 3D data sensing
devices, the use of 3D data becomes popular in computer vision
applications [32]. Browatzki et al. [33] compared the performance
of object detection based on 2D and 3D data respectively, as well as
combination of 2D and 3D data, and found that 3D-based and com-
bined approaches showed higher classication accuracy than the
2D data-based approach. The 3D data-based approach performs
better because 3D data is less sensitive to lighting or color vari-
ances, contains geometrical cues, and provides better separation
from the background [34]. In construction, laser-based 3D imaging
systems and stereo-vision systems are generally used to collect
real-time 3D data on construction sites [35,36,89,90]. For construc-
tion tasks conducted in indoor environments such as nishing

work, RGB-D sensors such as MS Kinect can provide depth
images that are generally used to analyze construction workers＊
postures and motions [27,28].
Table 3 shows comparison of diverse image sensing devices that
can provide real-time data. Selection of image sensing devices
should depend on the purpose of computer vision techniques
applied. Chi and Caldas [21] suggested criteria on selection of
appropriate image data collection devices for object identication
and tracking on construction sites such as frame rate, outdoor
application capability, reliable reading range, object localization
capability and 3D modeling capability. Recently, the use of multiple
cameras and 3D reconstruction techniques enables collecting 3D
localization and modeling from 2D images [28,37,38]. However,
as opposed to 2D cameras whose range varies depending on lens
disparity and adjusted exposure values, selection of 3D imaging
devices should be made more carefully because sensing accuracy
is affected by distance from a camera and a scene [21,39], or light-
ing condition [36]. For example, Flash LADAR (Laser Detection and
Ranging) and RGB-D sensors are usually unable to collect range data
accurately in the presence of sunlight and have relatively short
maximum range, which make it difcult to utilize these sensors
on outdoor applications [28,40]. In addition, mobility and porta-
bility of devices need to also be considered because of continuously
changing working spaces according to work progress. For example,
even though stationary or pan-tilt-zoom cameras are already
installed at construction sites, the cameras could not cover all sce-
nes where construction tasks take place, and thus a potable camera
with a tripod could be required to collect 2D images.

3.2. Object detection

To build physical structures, construction tasks involve numer-
ous activities performed by multiple workers and equipment using
various techniques and materials on a jobsite. To make computers
understand a complex scene on construction sites, it is necessary to
identify what kinds of project entities such as workers, equipment,
and materials on the scene are involved for the tasks from the col-
lected imagery data. Object detection can be directly used to iden-
tify unsafe conditions and acts at construction sites (e.g., failure to
wear personal protective equipment and damaged area of building
or defected material). For example, detection of safety gears such
as safety vests and hard hats helps to distinguish construction
workers from others (e.g., supervisors, engineers or pedestrians)
[10,41每43,85,86], as well as to detect construction workers who
do not wear safety gears for safety observation [18,87]. In addition,
detection of construction workers and material surrounding equip-
ment helps operators who have limited visibility on job sites to
prevent collisions [14]. In addition, object detection in images or
video streams acts as a rst step for other computer vision-based
approaches such as object tracking, and action recognition. For
example, studies in construction have applied object detection
algorithms to detect project entities such as construction workers,
diverse construction equipment or multiple entities for initializa-
tion of objects to be tracked in a sequence of images [10,46,47]
or for tracking objects frame-by-frame in sequential
images
[21,40,48].

3.2.1. Technical aspects of object detection
The most common approach for object detection is to divide the
image window into small spatial regions, to extract features from
the local windows, and then to classify the object of interest
through supervised learning [92]. For an exhaustive search at dif-
ferent resolutions and locations within the image, a sliding win-
dow approach, which aims to nd a bounding box around the
object, is generally applied [91,93]. Once a potential sub-window
is determined, image features, which are simplied representations

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

243

Table 2
Overview of literature review on studies for computer vision-based safety and health monitoring.

Techniques

Types of data

Objective

Object detection

2D images

Automated monitoring of work zone productivity or safety [61]

Detection of construction workers not wearing a hard hat for safety [18]
Detection of construction workers for initialization [43]
Automated vision-based monitoring system to detect off-highway dump trucks
[46]
Part-based object recognition model to detect a single excavator [47]
Kinematic key nodes model for dynamically detecting and locating movable
objects [49]

Tracking construction workers for automated project performance control
monitoring [19]
Comparison of 2D vision tracking methods [20]

Target objects

Construction equipment and
worker
Hard hat
Multiple construction workers
Multiple dump trucks

Single hydraulic excavator
Hydraulic excavator

Construction worker

Object tracking

2D images

Object detection and
tracking

3D images

2D images

2D images and range
data
3D images

Action recognition

2D images

3D images
3D images and
motion data

Construction equipment and
worker materials
Evaluation of the accuracy of vision and radio frequency tracking methods [79] Multiple workers
Tracking 3D locations of construction entities [38]
Construction equipment and
worker
Static and dynamic objects

Real-time 3D modeling using Flash LADAR to detect and track objects [39]

Acquisition of 3D spatial coordinates of project entities [10]

Detection and tracking of multiple workers from static and moving cameras
[31]
Detection of construction workers and equipment while idle and in close
proximity [48]
Automated image-based safety assessment method for earthmoving and
surface mining activities [21]
Identication and tracking of objects surrounding the equipment [14]

Measurement of idle time of hydraulic excavators through action recognition
[26]
Classication of actions by construction equipment and workers [24]

Single action recognition of earthmoving equipment [25]
Vision-based monitoring framework for behavior-based safety management
[29]
Monitoring ergonomic risk on posture of construction workers [27]
Unsafe action detection during ladder climbing [28]

Construction equipment and
worker materials
Multiple workers

Construction equipment and
worker
Construction equipment

Construction worker materials

Construction equipment

Construction equipment and
worker
Construction equipment
Construction worker

Construction worker
Construction worker

Table 3
Comparison of image sensing devices.

Devices

Stationary camera
Potable camera
Flash LADAR
Stereo vision camera
RGB-D sensor

Types of data

2D images
2D images
3D images
2D + 3D images
3D images

Available environment

Both indoor and outdoor
Both indoor and outdoor
Indoor
Both indoor and outdoor
Indoor

Sensing range

Portability

Long
Long
Short (less than 10 m)
Long (accurate less than 10 m)
Short (less than 5 m)

No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

of sub-window images, need to be extracted by selecting
appropriate feature descriptors [32]. To extract features for 2D
objects, dense Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [51], Local
Binary Pattern (LBP) [52], Scale Invariant Feature Transform (SIFT)
[54] have been proven successful for object classication [53]. One
of the most popular methods for feature extraction for 3D data (i.e.,
point clouds)
is the spin-image, which is used for surface
representation [55]. Shape and geometry features [56] or Kernel
descriptors [57] have been also used for depth images (i.e.,
RBG-D images) where spin image features do not always perform
well [57]. Given the features, objects on 2D or 3D images can be
classied using various methods. For example, a linear support
vector machine approach has been widely used to provide an
effective solution for
classication problem, especially for
histogram-based image classication [58]. To learn extensive
datasets that require a large learning capacity, Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) have been proven to provide robust and
effective classiers [59]. Fig. 2 shows a conceptual illustration of
overall procedures for object detection, which has been proven
by Papageorgiou et al. [96].

For object detection, numerous algorithms have been developed
as mentioned above, and results reveal that their performance
highly relies on applications (e.g., objects) and conditions (e.g.,
light and viewpoint) where the algorithms are tested. Thus, previ-
ous studies in construction have tested existing algorithms under
construction-specic conditions (e.g., moving objects), and try to
identify optimal algorithms, which perform well for object detec-
tion in construction environments. As targets for object detection
are generally moving in construction, background subtraction
methods are widely used to nd the rectangular foreground
regions where the target objects to be classied exist, such that
the exhaustive search which requires high computational effort
is not required [41,43,46]. Because existing algorithms (e.g., a Mix-
tures of Gaussian method, a Codebook-based method, a Bayesian
Model-based, and a median lter method) for moving object seg-
mentation in 2D images shows different accuracy and computation
time [41], previous studies selected algorithms that were suitable
for their research purposes [43,46]. For example, Rezazadeh Azar
and McCabe [46] applied the Bayesian Model for more accurate
segmentation results while Park and Brilakis [43] focused on

244

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

Fig. 2. Overall procedure for object detection.

computational efciency, and thus selected the median lter
method. To build a suitable 3D local model (i.e., target object) from
range data, clustering algorithms such as a grid-based clustering
algorithm [60] have been used [14]. For feature extraction, various
types of features such as shape, color and motion features have
been generally used, but there is a challenging issue to extract
features that are compatible to various appearances of objects in
construction [43]. As a shape-based feature, Haar-like and HOG
features are widely applied for construction worker or equipment
detection [43,47]. Chi and Caldas [61] combined shape-based
features such as aspect ratio, height-normalized area size and
percentage of occupancy of the bounding box, and a color-based
feature such as average gray-scaled color of the area (bounding
box) because they were not affected by the size of images. As a
nal step for object detection of project entities, previous studies
applied various classiers such as Support Vector Machine (SVM)
[47], k-Nearest Neighbors (k-NN) [43] and Adaptive Boosting
(AdaBoost) learning algorithm [46] to learn classiers based on
extracted features and to recognize project entities (e.g., equip-
ment, workers) on images.

3.2.2. Research challenges and future study areas in object detection
One of the challenging issues for detection of project entities is
classifying different shapes of project entities depending on
viewpoints [47]. To address the issue regarding different visual ori-
entations, Rezazadeh Azar and McCabe [47] attempted to learn a
classier using images with eight viewpoints of equipment, which
have been showed robust performance in vehicle detection [64].
Another issue caused by equipment with kinematic joints is chang-
ing poses of equipment according to its movement. Yuan and Cai
[49] found that the use of kinematic features can serve as deform-
able and semantic object features that represent the equipment＊s
movement because construction equipment with kinematic joints
has specic kinematic constraints from mechanic specication,
and proposed the kinematic key nodes model for deformable
object feature extraction and template training.
With respect to the object detection approach, previous studies
in construction have made signicant progress in the detection of
specic types of objects (e.g., workers, equipment or damaged
area) on scene images to address certain types of unsafe conditions
(e.g., PPE). For comprehensive risk assessment, further research
necessitates more attention on semantic understanding of the
scene such as contextual relationships among objects within the
scene. For example, to identify unsafe conditions associated with
congested work areas at construction sites, several subtasks should
be performed simultaneously such as detection of diverse project

entities (e.g., workers, equipment and material), labeling of mean-
ingful regions (e.g., designated area for stocking material, designat-
ed paths for workers and equipment, building structure), and even
3D reconstruction of the scene to obtain spatial
information
required to understand relationships between project entities
and environments. These complex tasks are called ＆＆holistic scene
understanding [65]＊＊ or ＆＆total scene understanding [66].＊＊ While
detecting and classifying isolated objects and object classes is a cri-
tical component of object recognition, further studies based on
these approaches are needed to be done to reach a complete
understanding of visual scenes for safety and health monitoring
at construction sites.

3.3. Object tracking

One of the key factors to determine unsafe conditions or acts at
construction sites is the location of project entities as described in
Section 2. Therefore, previous research efforts in construction have
emphasized the need for automated tracking of project entities for
real-time safety monitoring at construction sites. Compared with
sensor-based tracking approaches such as Radio-Frequency Identi-
cation (RFID) tags, Ultra WideBand (UWB), and Global Positioning
Systems (GPS), computer vision-based tracking methods have sev-
eral advantages that: (1) it does not need to attach sensors on pro-
ject entities and install signal receivers; (2) camera views can cover
a large size of construction areas; and (3) multiple project entities
on a scene can be tracked simultaneously [10]. Computer vision-
based tracking approaches in construction have primarily focused
on 2D-based tracking of project entities from video streams
[19,20]. However, 2D locations of objects on images may not be
enough to extract substantial information for the movement of
project entities because proximity between objects or movements
of objects (i.e., speed) cannot accurately be measured on a 2D
plane, and thus it is difcult to determine whether the activities
of project entities are safe or not without acquisition of 3D posi-
tions of project entities [10,38]. Therefore, 3D object tracking is
essential
in construction applications for safety and health
monitoring of project entities.

3.3.1. Technical aspects of object tracking
Computer vision-based object tracking can create the temporal
trajectory of detected objects as they move on a scene [50]. Once a
vision tracker is initialized at the rst frame of video streams
through object detection algorithms, the tracking algorithm tracks
the 2D projections of objects by assigning consistent labels to the
tracked objects in a sequence of images from video streams. A

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

245

Fig. 3. Overall procedure for object tracking.

conceptual illustration for object tracking, which have been proven
by Yilmaz et al. [50] is shown in Fig. 3.
For 2D vision-based tracking, three types of methods have been
widely used: (1) point tracking, (2) kernel tracking, and (3) silhou-
ette tracking [50]. Point tracking uses feature points representing
objects, and detect the object by matching the points in every
frame. Kernel tracking tracks an object by computing the motion
of the kernel that represents the object shape and appearance in
consecutive frames. When the objects have complex shapes such
as human, silhouette-based methods can provide more reliable
tracking, compared with other tracking methods. The silhouette
of the object is represented by a color histogram, object edges or
contour, and thus silhouette trackers detect the object in each
frame by shape matching and contour tracking. Studies related to
2D-based tracking in construction have focused on selection of
appropriate algorithms and methods for construction application
by comparing tracking performances for construction project enti-
ties such as workers and equipment. For example, Park et al. [20]
performed a comparative study of 2D vision trackers (point-, ker-
nel- and contour-based tracking) by evaluating their performance
to determine the most effective solution for construction applica-
tions, and found kernel-based methods the most stable and reliable
methods for tracking project entities in construction environ-
ments. Teizer and Vela [19] focused on the tracking of workers,
and tested one kernel-based tracking method, mean-shift tracking
[67], and three segmentation-based tracking methods such as
Bayesian segmentation [68], active contours [69], and graph-cuts
[70] that have been known to perform well for larger, non-rigid
or variable targets. The algorithms were tested using diverse con-
struction scenarios to assess tracking performance of four tracking
methods and to identify their potential benets and disadvantages.
The overall results indicated that the Bayesian method performed
best. Teizer and Vela [19] also found that contour-based methods
may not be suitable for tracking a worker with variations in shapes
depending on postures and camera positions, and the graph-cut
method suffered from false positive image data.
For 3D object tracking, two types of approaches have been
applied in construction applications: (1) triangulation-based 3D
position tracking using multiple cameras [10,21,38], and (2) object
tracking using 3D range sensors [39]. The triangulation-based
method uses video streams from at least two cameras with differ-
ent viewpoints [10,38]. This method basically starts from 2D object
tracking of objects from two video streams. The tracked 2D trajec-
tories are then converted into 3D coordinates by triangulation
based on the fundamental matrix, focal length, and epipolar geo-
metry, which associates two camera views. Despite the advantage
of this approach, use of this method in real-time monitoring is lim-
ited due to computational time required to process the data [38].
Stereo vision camera systems (e.g., Bumblebee XB3, Point Grey
Research, Inc.) that have laterally displaced multiple lenses and

capability to compute depth information using triangulation in real
time can be an alternative solution to reduce computing time [21].
Compared with the triangulation-based method, 3D range data has
an advantage that 3D localization is straightforward once the
object is detected. Among various types of 3D range sensing
devices, ash LADAR [39] is suitable devices for real-time monitor-
ing because they are portable and inexpensive devices with a fast
frame rate (over 10 Hz). The 3D coordinates of project entities
can provide information on the movement (e.g., path, speed, accel-
eration and direction) and location (e.g., proximity to other enti-
ties) necessary to identify unsafe conditions or acts at
construction sites [10]. For example, the speed of equipment can
be monitored to identify speed limit violations, and the path and
location of equipment or workers can be used to detect dangerous
access violation and close proximity violations between equipment
or equipment and workers [21].

3.3.2. Research challenges and future study areas in object tracking
Considering that construction tasks frequently involve interac-
tions between workers and equipment, safety and health monitor-
ing requires simultaneous multiple targets tracking, which is
challenging due to interacting trajectories causing occlusions and
similar appearance of objects [31]. To address this issue, Yang
et al. [31] suggested a robust multiple workforces tracking scheme
using either stationary or pan-tilt-zoom cameras.
Interactions
between workers may result in tracking failure, which indicates
that the workers are labeled wrongly. To manage the situations
where workers are overlapped on images, Yang et al. [31] classied
occlusion scenarios into three possible sequences: (1) no occlu-
sion; (2) partial occlusion; and (3) severe occlusion. For the partial
occlusion case, stepwise tracking (i.e., track the worker close to
camera rst, remove the pixels belonging the rst target, and then
track the other worker) was applied while the trajectories of work-
ers were predicted by using the Kalman lter prediction when the
workers are severely overlapped, and thus it is impossible to seg-
ment two workers on images. Although this approach showed
robust tracking results on articial scenarios, changing appearance
of workers or severe occlusions on too many consequence frames
are still challenging issues for multiple object tracking of workers.
The primary goal of studies on object tracking is to improve the
accuracy of location estimation of project entities. In addition to
the effectiveness of tracking algorithms, the accuracy can typically
be affected by the distances between the cameras and project enti-
ties, and thus selection of the optimized camera location need to be
considered to improve monitoring quality [21]. Also, camera
calibration processes are of importance for large-scale projects as
objects at various distances are seen and captured on a single
image [71]. Furthermore, once accurate 3D locations of project
entities are obtained, methods for displaying geometrical informa-
tion to the interested users effectively should be investigated in

246

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

future studies [10]. Brilakis et al. [10] suggested two possible solu-
tions; display the movement of project entities in a virtual 3D
space environment such as 3D CAD model, or superimpose trajec-
tories on video images.

3.4. Action recognition

Object detection and location tracking provide useful data to
observe and evaluate ongoing works and working environments
based on the scene context (e.g., absence of personnel protective
equipment and safety devices) and positional information (e.g.,
close proximity between workers and equipment).
In cer-
tain situations, however, such information may not sufciently
allow for the comprehensive understanding of the scene in a safety
context. For example, the proximity between an excavator and
workers may not directly imply an unsafe condition if the excava-
tor is not operating. On the other hand, when the excavator moves
and rotates its boom and bucket to dig soil, workers working near
the excavator are exposed to signicant hazards if the operator of
the excavator fails to recognize the workers. Furthermore, it is
especially difcult to determine the risk of unsafe acts (e.g., reach-
ing too far to one side on a ladder) that take place during a con-
struction activity without motion and postural information; for
instance, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
recommends avoiding awkward postures (e.g., bending at the
waist, twisting while lifting) to prevent ergonomic risk during
material handling. These examples demonstrate the need for dif-
ferent types of information that help fully understand the scene
(e.g., what a worker or equipment is doing) to identify particular
unsafe acts and conditions. To this end, action recognition tech-
niques have been applied to construction as a means to extract
motion information from imagery data.

3.4.1. Technical aspects of action recognition
In the computer vision domain, human action recognition has
been studied for the last few decades for many applications,
including visual surveillance, video retrieval, and human每comput-
er interaction. To analyze existing methods in detail, Poppe [72]
conducted an extensive review on human action recognition in
computer vision community. According to Poppe [72], human
action recognition is the process of labeling images with action
labels. It requires two steps: (1) image representation, and (2)
action classication. Image representation for human action recog-
nition is the extraction of human features (e.g., shapes and tempo-
ral motions) from images, which is conceptually similar to feature
extraction for object detection. However, the features for action
recognition should contain rich information, which is enough to
classify diverse actions. Types of features for image representation
can be divided into: (1) global representation which encodes the
region of human body as a whole; (2) local representation which
uses a collection of independent local patches; and (3) applica-
tion-specic representation such as joint locations or joint angles
from human skeletons, and accelerations of motions. Once images
containing human action are represented, image features are clas-
sied as specic actions using diverse classication methods such
as direct classication (e.g., k-NN and SVM classiers), temporal
state-space models (e.g., Hidden Markov models (HMM), Condi-
tional random elds (CRF)), and detection-based methods (e.g.,
bag-of-words coding). Although not directly applicable, the proce-
dures and algorithms for human action recognition can be also
effectively used for equipment action recognition [25]. The overall
procedure for action recognition is illustrated in Fig. 4.
In construction, action recognition has also been studied for
various applications such as productivity and safety analysis by
tracking the movements of project resources. Previous research
efforts in the construction community have tested and further

developed diverse vision-based approaches to both image repre-
sentation and action classication, which are suitable to track
and recognize motions of construction equipment and workers
[24每29]. One of the commonly used approaches for image repre-
sentations of equipment and workers is a silhouette-based feature,
which exemplies a global representation approach [26,27]. Zou
and Kim [26] segmented the silhouette of an excavator in Hue,
Saturation, and Value (HSV) color space, and calculated the cen-
troid (the center of mass) pixel location of the silhouette to deter-
mine whether the excavator is moving or not by comparing the
distance between the centroid in two consecutive images with
the threshold value. Ray and Teizer [27] converted the range data
of the region of interest (worker) obtained from a Kinect into
grayscale values of person, and extracted a row of feature vectors
from the grayscale image. After extracting feature vectors repre-
senting workers, poses of worker such as standing, squatting,
stooping, and crawling were classied using Linear Discriminant
Analysis (LDA) [27].
However, silhouette-based approaches that rely on abstract
information of image features may generally perform well only
for simply distinguishable actions and produces unreliable results
sensitive to viewpoint, noise, and occlusions [72]. Taking into
account that images taken from construction sites commonly con-
tain signicant noise and occlusions and that the objects of interest
are articulated equipment (e.g., backhoes) and human bodies, local
representations which represent images as a collection of local
descriptors or patches may be more appropriate. Gong et al. [24]
applied space每time interest point detector [73] to detect interest
points on images of equipment and workers, and the HOG and His-
togram of Optical Flow (HoF) descriptors to describe the interest
points. To nd representative features for each action, thousands
of features were clustered using K-means algorithms, creating a
code book of features, and then using Bayesian learning methods,
actions in video streams were classied. Golparvar-Fard et al.
[25] applied similar approaches with Gong et al. [24] by combining
space每time interest point detectors [74] and local descriptor such
as HOG [75]. In this paper, SVM classier was learned using a set of
spatio-temporal patterns of descriptors, called a code word to clas-
sify actions of equipment such as digging, hauling, dumping and
swinging.
The approaches using image-based features have shown
promising results and provided a valuable insight for action recog-
nition of construction equipment and workers. For complex
actions, however, the use of joint locations and joint angles can
enhance the performance of action recognition by utilizing rich
representation of actions [72]. The performance of this approach
relies heavily on data collection of articulated objects, which is
an ongoing challenge. To address this issue, recent studies have
focused on motion capture techniques to extract human skeletons
from imagery data. One of the widely used methods is a RGB-D
sensor-based approach. A RGB-D sensor captures RGB-D images
on scenes, and 3D human skeletons are extracted by using joint
detection algorithms [27] or shape-tting algorithms [28,88].
However, because the RGB-D sensor has a short operation range
(about 4每5 m), and is sensitive to lighting conditions, previous
studies are limited to indoor environments [27,28]. Han and Lee
[29] suggested a state-of-the-art vision-based motion capture
approach using multiple cameras that functions under less con-
straints on operating conditions. This approach applied 2D pose
estimation algorithms to extract 2D skeletons from multiple view-
points of images, and 3D reconstruction of 2D skeletons to obtain
3D skeletons. Compared with the RGB-D sensor-based approaches,
the accuracy of the camera-based approach was, as yet, relatively
low, but sufcient to recognize particular unsafe actions in the
experiments [29]. Starbuck et al. [36] tried to combine merits of
an RGB-D sensor-based approach (accuracy) and a camera-based

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

247

Fig. 4. Overall procedure for action recognition.

approach (long operation range) by suggesting a stereo vision cam-
era-based motion capture approach. Unlike image-based action
recognition methods that apply classication, human skeleton-
based action recognition deals with actions as a series of move-
ments of the human body, allowing more complicated action
recognition [28,29].
Once actions by equipment and workers are recognized, the risk
associated with the actions can be evaluated based on existing
safety and health rules. With regard to equipment, the combina-
tion of location information from object tracking and operating
status (idling and operating) from action recognition can provide
comprehensive understanding on potential unsafe acts or condi-
tions. Construction workers are exposed to both safety and health
risks according to their actions, and therefore different criteria are
required for safety and health monitoring respectively. Han et al.
[28] and Han and Lee [29] dened unsafe actions from literature
review, and by comparing dened unsafe action templates with
workers＊ motion data over time, unsafe actions by workers are
automatically detected. Ray and Teizer [27] evaluated ergonomic
risks based on body angles during performing manual tasks by
using posture-based ergonomic analysis methods. For more
fundamental ergonomic risk analysis of workers＊ postures and
movements, Seo et al. [76] proposed motion-data driven biome-
chanical analysis for identication of tasks generating excessive
musculoskeletal stresses.

3.4.2. Research challenges and future study areas in action recognition
Action recognition is one of the more challenging topics in com-
puter vision due to large variations and complexity in movements
that change over time. Golparvar-Fard et al. [25] investigated

current challenging issues on the state-of-the-art computer
vision-based action recognition in construction applications〞those
are: (1) lack of datasets for action recognition of diverse types of
equipment; (2) complex and articulated actions of construction
equipment and workers; (3) lack of knowledge to dene a time-
series of actions (i.e., starting point and duration); (4) simultane-
ous action recognition of multiple project entities; and (5) lack of
a holistic approach to benchmarking, monitoring, and visualization
of performance information.
Several studies have attempted to address these issues. For
example, with regard to datasets, Golparvar-Fard et al. [25] pre-
sented the rst comprehensive video dataset for action recognition
of excavators and dump trucks. Articulated actions by equipment
and workers have been addressed in several studies by using local
representation of
image features [24,25] and skeleton-based
motion data [28,29]. The use of dynamic time warping (DTW)
can be a solution for recognizing a time-series of actions with
different times and paces because of the capacity to measure a
distance between action samples with different
lengths to
detect specic actions of interest among sequential actions [28].
However, several research problems such as action recognition
for multiple equipment/workers and a holistic approach of action
recognition for practitioners have not been fully solved yet, and
thus further studies are required for achieving robust automatic
action recognition to monitor unsafe actions in practice.

4. Discussion

In this section, we discuss technical and practical
issues
that commonly arise when applying diverse computer vision

248

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

techniques for safety and health monitoring at real construction
sites, and identify potential solutions and future directions to
address the issues. These include a lack of task-specic and
quantitative metrics for evaluation of unsafe conditions and acts,
technical obstacles (e.g., occlusions, proper camera positions and
datasets) due to dynamic conditions at construction sites, and
privacy issues related to continuous monitoring.

4.1. Lack of task-specic and quantitative metrics to evaluate unsafe
conditions and acts

Computer vision techniques used for safety and health monitor-
ing have been mainly focused on extracting useful information
such as presence/absence of objects of interest on scenes, location
information, and action categories. Based on the information, eval-
uation of safety and health risks can be made by comparing current
status with existing safety and health rules (e.g., checklist). Howev-
er, because existing checklists contain general rules for construc-
tion safety and health and are assessed by subjective evaluation
based on safety personnel＊s experience, those checklists cannot
be directly used for computer vision-based monitoring for specic
situations. For example, while unsafe acts such as failure to wear
personal protective equipment (PPE) can be assessed only by
detecting PPE on images, identication of some unsafe conditions
and acts require specic rules for proper operation speed at diverse
site conditions and acceptable proximity between objects (e.g.,
excessive speeds of equipment and improper working position).
Identifying specic and quantitative rules to evaluate construc-
tion tasks should therefore be preceded for computer vision-based
safety and health monitoring, but only a few studies have
addressed this issue. For example, Chi and Caldas [21] identied
the possible causes of accidents during earthmoving and surface
mining activities from literature, and suggested specic spatial
needs for safety assessment of equipment operation (e.g., high
operation speed, access to dangerous areas, and close proximity
between objects) based on current safety regulations, academic
safety studies, industrial standards and discussion with industrial
experts. Similarly, Han and Lee [29] investigated a list of critical
body postures and motions that may lead to traumatic or ergo-
nomic injuries from the OSHA accident statistics, training materi-
als, and checklists in the previous studies, and then evaluated
workers＊ actions to determine whether the actions are unsafe or
not. Specic ergonomic rules such as NIOSH lifting equation [77]
were also used to evaluate workers＊ posture quantitatively during
lifting tasks [27]. These studies imply that there is no commonly
acceptable rule available for computer vision-based risk identica-
tion during construction tasks, and specic and quantiable rules
should be pre-identied for target tasks to be evaluated from
diverse sources. Thus,
for practical application of computer
vision-based safety and health monitoring for diverse construction
tasks, further studies should be completed to identify task-specic
and quantitative metrics for construction task evaluation.

4.2. Obstacles due to dynamic conditions at construction sites

The pre-requisite for successful safety and health monitoring is
the reliability and accuracy of data collected by computer vision
techniques, which is challenging due to unique characteristics of
construction. Construction is characterized by its dynamics such
as worksites involving multiple workers, diverse types of equip-
ment and material, and continuously changing working environ-
ments. These dynamic features at construction sites cause several
technical issues for computer vision application, such as occlusion,
the selection of appropriate camera positions, and the need for
comprehensive image datasets with diverse viewpoints.

4.2.1. Occlusion
Occlusions are one of the major issues when applying computer
vision techniques for construction environments. Particularly, con-
struction activities involving numerous equipment and workers
taking place often in a congested space inevitably generate a sig-
nicant level of occlusions (i.e., self-occlusion, interobject occlu-
sion, and occlusion by the background scene structure) [50]. To
address this issue, Yang et al. [31] tested diverse occlusion scenar-
ios when tracking project entities by suggesting occlusion manage-
ment scheme. However, this paper found that most studies in
construction ignored occlusions by assuming no occlusion in the
scene. Resolving occlusions is a critical topic in computer vision
community. Basically, if the object of interest is invisible on the
scene, it is impossible to detect and track the object. However, if
occlusions occur temporarily or partially, several algorithmic solu-
tions exist. For example, for resolving partial occlusions due to
inter-occluded humans, Wu and Nevatia [78] suggested a part-
based representation for humans using edgelet features, and
explicitly model the inter-object occlusion. This approach showed
a robust detection result on a partially occluded human. Even
when the object of interest is completely lost due to occlusions
by the background scene structure, there are several ways to
recover the missing trajectories. One of the common methods for
complete occlusion for object tracking is to predict the trajectory
of the object by linear dynamic or nonlinear dynamic models
[50]. A Kalman lter that was used by Yang et al. [31] is an example
of this approach for estimating the location and motion of the
object. Combining vision-based approaches with sensor-based
approaches can be also a practical solution to cope with occlusions
as well as to enhance performance, considering that vision-based
approaches are sensitive to the environments (e.g., lighting condi-
tions and occlusions) where construction tasks are performed [25].
Yang et al. [79] compared a vision-based tracking and a commer-
cial UWB tracking system in diverse construction scenarios, and
found that the vision-based tracking became more reliable and
accurate when combined with the UWB system, compared with
the scenario where each approach was applied respectively.

4.2.2. Selection of appropriate camera positions
Although video or surveillance cameras are increasingly preva-
lent on construction sites, the use of these cameras for safety and
health monitoring can be limited due to: (1) continuously changing
working spaces for specic construction tasks, (2) limited accessi-
bility to the working spaces, and (3) frequent occlusions when
multiple tasks are conducted in a limited space. For these reasons,
the number and position of cameras should be carefully deter-
mined prior to work. In practice, a preconstruction conference to
assess potential hazards which may arise during the project is an
essential step for safety and health management. Generally, sub-
contractors prepare a safety plan that contains possible serious
hazards and their locations [4]. Based on the information, types
of tasks to be monitored and locations where the tasks are per-
formed should be determined prior to construction. However,
numbers and positions of camera required for vision-based
monitoring vary depending on computer vision algorithms applied
because most of studies in construction assumed specic site con-
ditions and camera positions. In other words, most previous stud-
ies reviewed in this paper tested and validated the proposed
method in experiments rather than in an actual site. To make com-
puter vision-based monitoring more practical, more studies need
to be performed to test proposed methods in diverse eld settings,
and thus suggest a guideline for recording settings of cameras, con-
sidering various site conditions. Harsh conditions may arise where
the installation of camera that covers the whole view of the scene
of tasks is impossible (e.g., large earthmoving work), or the access
to the site is limited (e.g., roong, bridge construction). Recently,

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

249

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) that operate under remote/
autonomous control are considered as alternative devices to collect
real-time video of the current situation on construction sites
[80,95]. Further research efforts are therefore required to evaluate
the feasibility of UAVs to collect imagery data for vision-based
safety and health monitoring without spatial constraints.

4.2.3. Comprehensive image datasets with diverse viewpoints
There are no comprehensive datasets publicly available for com-
puter vision studies in construction. Previous studies in construc-
tion have used their own datasets, which may result in biased
algorithms to a particular dataset [72]. Considering the dynamics
in construction where diverse types of equipment are involved,
and various actions by workers and equipment exist, larger and
more complex image datasets from various viewpoints should be
required to guide research efforts to practical and realistic direction.
The use of common datasets for computer vision studies in con-
struction is also important for benchmarking and evaluating devel-
oped computer vision algorithms [25]. Golparvar-Fard et al. [25]
emphasized the need for comprehensive datasets in construction
domain, and introduced a new dataset for action recognition for
commonly used earthmoving equipment (dump trucks and excava-
tors). However, more research work should be done on the creation
of publicly available datasets that are not only application-specic
(e.g., object detection and action recognition), but also contain suf-
cient variation on types of equipment, viewpoints, and actions.

4.3. Privacy issue due to continuous monitoring at construction sites

The rapidly developing computing environment can now collect
＆context-aware＊ information about what, when and where workers
do [81]; this invokes controversy as to whether automated
monitoring of workers using cameras or location tracking devices
should be allowed or not [82]. Some support automated workplace
surveillance due to organizational benets, while others criticize it
because it can increase stress in workers by essentially dehuman-
izing workers by invading worker privacy [82]. In particular, videos
required for computer vision-based monitoring contain privacy-in-
trusive data, and thus vision-based monitoring at construction
sites may cause undesirable effects to workers. Ball [83] insisted
that excessive monitoring of workers at workplaces can be detri-
mental to workers for a number of reasons: (1) privacy concerns
when workers＊ information is disclosed without their consent;
(2) restriction of creative behaviors if workers realize their actions
are monitored; and (3) creation of ＆anticipatory conformity＊ where
workers perform a task in a accepting way, reducing the amount of
their commitment and motivation.
To mediate the negative effects of vision-based monitoring,
careful managerial considerations are required. For example,
because secret monitoring may create negative perceptions on
monitoring procedures and result in the loss of trust in manage-
ment, supervisors should not attempt to monitor a worker from
a concealed position [84]. The worker should be aware that he or
she will be monitored using video cameras. All employees must
understand the reason for vision-based safety and health monitor-
ing, and that it helps reduce injuries by eliminating the potential
causes of accidents [4].

5. Conclusion

This paper presented an extensive review of computer vision-
based approaches for safety and health monitoring at construction
sites. Based on the current practice for safety and health monitor-
ing, we derived potential roles of computer vision techniques for
identifying unsafe acts and conditions, and classied them into:

(1) scene-based; (2) location-based; and (3) action-based risk iden-
tication that can be achieved by specic techniques such as object
detection, object tracking, and action recognition respectively.
Object detection is not only a preliminary process for object
tracking and action recognition, but also a method for scene-based
identication of safety risks such as failure to wear PPE or damaged
area of structure. Object tracking is the process to track 2D or 3D
trajectories of project entities such as equipment and workers,
and provides information on locations and movements of project
entities that can be used to identify unsafe acts or conditions such
as speed limit violations of equipment, close proximity between
equipment or between equipment and workers. Action recognition
provides rich information on postures and motions of equipment
and workers, and thus unsafe acts can be automatically assessed.
This paper provided detailed summaries of technical aspects in
each category, and their applications in the construction communi-
ty along with technical challenges that previous studies have not
been fully addressed yet. Despite the recent progress in computer
vision-based approaches, lots of studies are still focusing on eld
data collection that is directly or potentially used for safety and
health monitoring, having several technical challenges. The chal-
lenges include: (1) comprehensive risk assessment through total
scene understanding; (2) improvement of tracking accuracy by
selecting appropriate camera positions and effective visualization
of tracking results; and (3) simultaneous recognition of actions
by multiple equipment/workers and action recognition in a holistic
manner for practitioners.
In addition, we discussed technical and practical issues that
may arise when applying computer vision-based safety and health
monitoring in practice. From the literature review, we need task-
specic and quantitative metrics to evaluate unsafe conditions
and acts based on information extracted from images because
there is no commonly acceptable rule that can be used for comput-
er vision-based risk identication. In addition, due to continuously
changing working environments and diverse project entities
involved in construction, several issues such as occlusion, selection
of appropriate camera positions, and needs for comprehensive
image datasets with diverse viewpoints should be addressed in
future studies for practicality of computer vision-based approach-
es. Continuous monitoring can also cause negative effects such as
privacy concerns, restriction of creative behavior, and decreased
motivation by construction workers; thus practitioners should
consider managerial (e.g., consent from workers and education)
or technical solutions (e.g., privacy preserving techniques) to miti-
gate the detrimental results.
Considering the current technical advancement and potential
benets from computer vision-based approaches, it is believed that
these challenges and issues will be solved in the near future. We also
expect that this paper can provide not only valuable insight to
researchers who work on computer vision-based safety and health
monitoring, but also opportunities and considerations to practition-
ers who want to apply computer vision techniques in practice.

Acknowledgements

The work presented in this paper was supported nancially
with a National Science Foundation Award (No. CMMI-1161123).
Any opinions, ndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not neces-
sarily reect the views of the National Science Foundation.

References

[1] Bureau of Labor Statistics, National Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries in
2012. USDL-13-1699, 2012a. <http://www.bls.gov/news.release/cfoi.nr0.htm>.

250

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

[2] Bureau of Labor Statistics, Nonfatal Occupational
Injuries and Illnesses
Requiring Days Away From Work, 2012. USDL-13-2257, 2012b. <http://
www.bls.gov/news.release/osh2.nr0.htm>.
[3] K. Ringen, J. Seegal, A. England, Safety and health in the construction industry,
Ann. Rev. Public Health 16 (1) (1995) 165每188.
[4] C.D. Reese, J.V. Eidson, Handbook of OSHA Construction Safety and Health, CRC
Press, 2006.
[5] H.W. Heinrich, Industrial Accident Prevention, McGraw-Hill Book Company,
New York, 1959.
[6] J. Hinze, R. Godfrey, An evaluation of safety performance measures for
construction projects, J. Constr. Res. 4 (01) (2003) 5每15.
[7] R.E. Levitt, Construction Safety Management, John Wiley & Sons, 1993.
[8] S. Taneja, B. Akinci, J.H. Garrett, L. Soibelman, E. Ergen, A. Pradhan, E.B. Anil,
Sensing and eld data capture for construction and facility operations, J.
Constr. Eng. Manage. 137 (10) (2011) 870每881.
[9] H. Laitinen, M. Marjamki, K. Pivrinta, The validity of the TR safety
observation method on building construction, Accid. Anal. Prevent. 31 (5)
(1999) 463每472.
[10] I. Brilakis, M.W. Park, G. Jog, Automated vision tracking of project related
entities, Adv. Eng. Inform. 25 (4) (2011) 713每724.
[11] M. Golparvar-Fard, F. Pea-Mora, Application of visualization techniques for
construction progress monitoring, Comput. Civil Eng. 2007 (2007) 27.
[12] J. Gong, C.H. Caldas, Computer vision-based video interpretation model for
automated productivity analysis of construction operations, J. Comput. Civil
Eng. 24 (3) (2009) 252每263.
[13] S.M. Shahandashti, S.N. Razavi, L. Soibelman, M. Berges, C.H. Caldas, I. Brilakis,
J. Teizer, P.A. Vela, C.T. Haas, J. Garrett, B. Akinci, Z. Zhu, Data fusion approaches
and applications for construction engineering, ASCE J. Constr. Eng. Manage.
Reston Virginia 137 (10) (2011) 863每869.
[14] S. Chi, C.H. Caldas, D.Y. Kim, A methodology for object identication and
tracking in construction based on spatial modeling and image matching
techniques, Comput.-Aid. Civil Inf. Eng. 24 (3) (2009) 199每211.
[15] M. Golparvar-Fard, J. Bohn, J. Teizer, S. Savarese, F. Pea-Mora, Evaluation of
image-based modeling and laser scanning accuracy for emerging automated
performance monitoring techniques, Automat. Constr. 20 (8) (2011) 1143每
1155.
[16] J. Hinze, Construction Safety, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1997.
[17] J.H. Elder, R.M. Goldberg, Image editing in the contour domain, IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 23 (3) (2001) 291每296.
[18] S. Du, M. Shehata, W. Badawy, Hard hat detection in video sequences based on
face features, motion and color
information, 2011 3rd International
Conference on Computer Research and Development (ICCRD), vol. 4, IEEE,
2011, pp. 25每29.
[19] J. Teizer, P.A. Vela, Personnel tracking on construction sites using video
cameras, Adv. Eng. Inform. 23 (4) (2009) 452每462.
[20] M.W. Park, A. Makhmalbaf, I. Brilakis, Comparative study of vision tracking
methods for tracking of construction site resources, Automat. Constr. 20 (7)
(2011) 905每915.
[21] S. Chi, C.H. Caldas, Image-based safety assessment: automated spatial safety
risk identication of earthmoving and surface mining activities, J. Constr. Eng.
Manage. 138 (3) (2012) 341每351.
[22] NIOSH, Preventing Injuries When Working with Hydraulic Excavators and
Backhoe Loaders, Publication No. 2004-107, The National
Institute for
Occupational Health and Safety, Cincinnati, OH, 2003. <http://www.cdc.gov/
niosh/docs/wp-solutions/2004-107/pdfs/2004-107.pdf> (accessed September
2014).
[23] N. Pradhananga, J. Teizer, Automatic spatio-temporal analysis of construction
equipment operations using GPS data, Autom. Constr. 29 (2013) 107每
122.
[24] J. Gong, C.H. Caldas, C. Gordon, Learning and classifying actions of construction
workers and equipment using Bag-of-Video-Feature-Words and Bayesian
network models, Adv. Eng. Inform. 25 (4) (2011) 771每782.
[25] M. Golparvar-Fard, A. Heydarian, J.C. Niebles, Vision-based action recognition
of earthmoving equipment using spatio-temporal features and support vector
machine classiers, Adv. Eng. Inform. 27 (4) (2013) 652每663.
[26] J. Zou, H. Kim, Using hue, saturation, and value color space for hydraulic
excavator idle time analysis, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 21 (4) (2007) 238每246.
[27] S.J. Ray,
J. Teizer, Real-time construction worker posture analysis for
ergonomics training, Adv. Eng. Inform. 26 (2) (2012) 439每455.
[28] S. Han, S. Lee, F. Pea-Mora, Vision-based detection of unsafe actions of a
construction worker: case study of ladder climbing, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 27 (6)
(2012) 635每644.
[29] S. Han, S. Lee, A vision-based motion capture and recognition framework for
behavior-based safety management, Automat. Constr. 35 (2013) 131每141.
[30] J.G. Everett, H. Halkali, T.G. Schlaff, Time-lapse video applications for
construction project management, J. Constr. Eng. Manage. 124 (3) (1998)
204每209.
[31] J. Yang, O. Arif, P.A. Vela, J. Teizer, Z. Shi, Tracking multiple workers on
construction sites using video cameras, Adv. Eng. Inform. 24 (4) (2010) 428每
434.
[32] M. Baum, Using spinImages for 3D Object Classication. Bachelor Thesis,
Faculty of Technology, Bielefeld University, 2011.
[33] B. Browatzki, J. Fischer, B. Graf, H.H. Bulthoff, C. Wallraven, Going into depth:
evaluating 2D and 3D cues for object classication on a new, large-scale object
dataset,
in: 2011 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
Workshops (ICCV Workshops), IEEE, 2011, pp. 1189每1195.

[34] R. Socher, B. Huval, B. Bath, C.D. Manning, A. Ng, Convolutional-recursive deep
learning for 3D object classication, in: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2012, pp. 665每673.
[35] Y.K. Cho, C. Wang, P. Tang, C.T. Haas, Target-focused local workspace modeling
for construction automation applications, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 26 (5) (2011)
661每670.
[36] R. Starbuck, J. Seo, S. Han, S. Lee, A stereo vision-based approach to marker-less
motion capture for on-site kinematic modeling of construction worker tasks,
in: Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computing in Civil and
Building Engineering (ICCCBE), Orlando, FL, 2014.
[37] M. Golparvar-Fard, F. Pea-Mora, C.A. Arboleda, S. Lee, Visualization of
construction progress monitoring with 4D simulation model overlaid on
time-lapsed photographs, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 23 (6) (2009) 391每404.
[38] M.W. Park, C. Koch, I. Brilakis, Three-dimensional tracking of construction
resources using an on-site camera system, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 26 (4) (2012)
541每549.
[39] J. Teizer, C.H. Caldas, C.T. Haas, Real-time three-dimensional occupancy grid
modeling for the detection and tracking of construction resources, J. Constr.
Eng. Manage. 133 (11) (2007) 880每888.
[40] D. Anderson, H. Herman, A. Kelly, Experimental characterization of
commercial ash ladar devices, in: International Conference of Sensing and
Technology, vol. 2, 2005.
[41] J. Gong, C.H. Caldas, An object recognition, tracking, and contextual reasoning-
based video interpretation method for
rapid productivity analysis of
construction operations, Automat. Constr. 20 (8) (2011) 1211每1226.
[42] G. Gualdi, A. Prati, R. Cucchiara, Contextual
information and covariance
descriptors for people surveillance. an application for safety of construction
workers, J. Image Video Process. 2011 (2011) 9.
[43] M.W. Park, I. Brilakis, Construction worker detection in video frames for
initializing vision trackers, Automat. Constr. 28 (2012) 15每25.
[44] J. Teizer, B.S. Allread, C.E. Fullerton, J. Hinze, Autonomous pro-active real-time
construction worker and equipment operator proximity safety alert system,
Automat. Constr. 19 (5) (2010) 630每640.
[45] T. Cheng, U. Mantripragada, J. Teizer, P.A. Vela, Automated trajectory and path
planning analysis based on ultra wideband data, ASCE J. Comput. Civil Eng.
Reston Virginia 26 (2012) 151每160.
[46] E. Rezazadeh Azar, B. McCabe, Automated visual recognition of dump trucks in
construction videos, J. Comput. Civil Eng. 26 (6) (2012) 769每781.
[47] E. Rezazadeh Azar, B. McCabe, Part based model and spatial每temporal
reasoning to recognize hydraulic excavators in construction images and
videos, Automat. Constr. 24 (2012) 194每202.
[48] M. Memarzadeh, M. Golparvar-Fard, J.C. Niebles, Automated 2D detection of
construction equipment and workers from site video streams using
histograms of oriented gradients and colors, Automat. Constr. 32 (2013) 24每
37.
[49] C. Yuan, H. Cai, Key nodes modeling for object detection and location on
construction site using color-depth cameras, in: Proceedings of the 15th
International Conference on Computing in Civil and Building Engineering
(ICCCBE), Orlando, FL, 2014.
[50] A. Yilmaz, O. Javed, M. Shah, Object tracking: a survey, Acm Comput. Surv.
(CSUR) 38 (4) (2006) 13.
[51] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection, in:
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2005, CVPR 2005, vol. 1, IEEE, 2005, pp. 886每893.
[52] X. Wang, T.X. Han, S. Yan, An HOG-LBP human detector with partial occlusion
handling, in: 2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on Computer Vision,
IEEE, 2009, pp. 32每39.
[53] Y. Lin, F. Lv, S. Zhu, M. Yang, T. Cour, K. Yu, T. Huang, Large-scale image
classication:
fast
feature extraction and svm training,
in: 2011 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), IEEE, 2011,
pp. 1689每1696.
[54] D.G. Lowe, Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints, Int. J.
Comput. Vis. 60 (2) (2004) 91每110.
[55] A. Johnson, Spin-Images: A Representation for 3-D Surface Matching. PhD
thesis, Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 1997.
[56] H.S. Koppula, A. Anand, T. Joachims, A. Saxena, Semantic labeling of 3d point
clouds for indoor scenes, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 2011, pp. 244每252.
[57] L. Bo, X. Ren, D. Fox, Depth kernel descriptors for object recognition, in: 2011
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
IEEE, 2011, pp. 821每826.
[58] O. Chapelle, P. Haffner, V.N. Vapnik, Support vector machines for histogram-
based image classication, IEEE Trans. Neural Networks 10 (5) (1999) 1055每
1064.
[59] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, G. Hinton, Imagenet classication with deep
convolutional neural networks, in: Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 25, 2012, pp. 1106每1114.
[60] P. Tan, M. Steinbach, V. Kumar, Introduction to Data Mining, Pearson Education
Inc, Boston, MA, 2005.
[61] S. Chi, C.H. Caldas, Automated object identication using optical video cameras
on construction sites, Comput. Aided Civ. Inf. Eng. 26 (5) (2011) 368每380.
[62] B. Coifman, D. Beymer, P. McLauchlan, J. Malik, A real-time computer vision
system for vehicle tracking and trafc surveillance, Transport. Res. Part C:
Emer. Technol. 6 (4) (1998) 271每288.
[63] T. Brosnan, D.W. Sun, Improving quality inspection of food products by
computer vision每每a review, J. Food Eng. 61 (1) (2004) 3每16.

J. Seo et al. / Advanced Engineering Informatics 29 (2015) 239每251

251

[64] P.E. Rybski, D. Huber, D.D. Morris, R. Hoffman, Visual classication
of coarse vehicle orientation using histogram of oriented gradients features,
in: IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, IEEE, New York, 2010, pp. 921每
928.
[65] G. Heitz, S. Gould, A. Saxena, D. Koller, Cascaded classication models:
combining models for holistic scene understanding, in: Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2009, pp. 641每648.
[66] L.J. Li, R. Socher, L. Fei-Fei, Towards total scene understanding: classication,
annotation and segmentation in an automatic framework, in: IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009. CVPR 2009, IEEE, 2009, pp.
2036每2043.
[67] D. Comaniciu, V. Ramesh, P. Meer, Kernel-based object tracking, IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 25 (5) (2003) 564每577.
[68] P.A. Vela, M. Niethammer, G.D. Pryor, A.R. Tannenbaum, R. Butts, D. Washburn,
Knowledge-based segmentation for tracking through deep turbulence, IEEE
Trans. Control Syst. Technol. 16 (3) (2008) 469每474.
[69] D. Freedman, T. Zhang, Active contours for tracking distributions, IEEE Trans.
Image Process. 13 (4) (2004) 518每526.
[70] J. Malcolm, Y. Rathi, A. Tannenbaum, Multi-object tracking through clutter
using graph cuts, in: IEEE 11th International Conference on Computer Vision,
2007, ICCV 2007, IEEE, 2007, pp. 1每5.
[71] H. Fathi, I. Brilakis, A transformational approach to explicit stereo camera
calibration for
improved euclidean accuracy
of
infrastructure
3D
reconstruction, in: 2013 ASCE International Workshop on Computing in Civil
Engineering, 2013.
[72] R. Poppe, A survey on vision-based human action recognition, Image Vision
Comput. 28 (6) (2010) 976每990.
[73] I. Laptev, On space-time interest points, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 64 (2每3) (2005)
107每123.
[74] J.C. Niebles, H. Wang, L. Fei-Fei, Unsupervised learning of human action
categories using spatial-temporal words, Int. J. Comput. Vis. 79 (3) (2008) 299每
318.
[75] I. Laptev, M. Marszalek, C. Schmid, B. Rozenfeld, Learning realistic human
actions from movies, in: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2008. CVPR 2008, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1每8.
[76] J. Seo, R. Starbuck, S. Han, S. Lee, T.J. Armstrong, Motion data-driven
biomechanical analysis during construction tasks on sites, J. Comput. Civil
Eng.
(2014),
http://dx.doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)CP.1943-5487.0000400.
B4014005.
[77] T.R. Waters, V. Putz-Anderson, A. Garg, L.J. Fine, Revised NIOSH equation for
the design and evaluation of manual lifting tasks, Ergonomics 36 (7) (1993)
749每776.
[78] B. Wu, R. Nevatia, Detection of multiple, partially occluded humans in a single
image by bayesian combination of edgelet part detectors, in: Tenth IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2005, ICCV 2005, vol. 1, IEEE,
2005, pp. 90每97.
[79] J. Yang, T. Cheng, J. Teizer, P.A. Vela, Z.K. Shi, A performance evaluation of
vision and radio frequency tracking methods for interacting workforce, Adv.
Eng. Inform. 25 (4) (2011) 736每747.

[80] M. Gheisari, J. Irizarry, B.N. Walker, UAS4SAFETY: the potential of unmanned
aerial systems for construction safety applications, in: Construction Research
Congress 2014 Construction in a Global Network, ASCE, pp. 1801每1810.
[81] H. Bristow, C. Baber, J.F. Knight, S.I. Woolley, Dening and evaluating context
for wearable computing, Int. J. Human每Comput. Stud. 60 (5每6) (2004) 798每
819.
[82] G.S. Alder, Ethical
issues
in electronic performance monitoring: a
consideration of deontological and teleological perspectives, J. Bus. Ethics 17
(7) (1998) 729每743.
[83] K. Ball, Workplace surveillance. An overview, Labor Hist. 51 (1) (2010) 87每106.
[84] F. Tabak, W.P. Smith, Privacy and electronic monitoring in the workplace. A
model of managerial cognition and relational trust development, Emp.
Respons. Rights J. 17 (3) (2005) 173每189.
[85] T.I.P. Weerasinghe, J.Y. Ruwanpura, Automated data acquisition system to
assess construction worker performance,
in: Proceedings of Construction
Research Congress 2009, 2009, pp. 11每20.
[86] T.I.P. Weerasinghe,
J.Y. Ruwanpura, Automated multiple objects tracking
system (AMOTS), in: Construction Research Congress 2010, 2010, pp. 11每20.
[87] T.I.P. Weerasinghe, Automated Construction Worker Performance and Tool-
time Measuring Model Using RGB Depth Camera and Audio Microphone Array
System, PhD Thesis, University of Calgary, 2013. <http://hdl.handle.net/11023/
605>.
[88] A. Khosrowpour,
J.C. Niebles, M. Golparvar-Fard, Vision-based workface
assessment using depth images for activity analysis of interior construction
operations, Automat. Constr. 48 (2014) 74每87.
[89] C. Wang, Y.K. Cho, Smart scanning and near real-time 3D surface modeling of
dynamic construction equipment from a point cloud, Automat. Constr. 49
(2014) 239每249.
[90] Y.K. Cho, M. Gai, Projection-recognition-projection method for automatic
object recognition and registration for dynamic heavy equipment operations, J.
Comput. Civil Eng. 28 (2014). SPECIAL ISSUE: 2012 International Conference
on Computing in Civil Engineering, A4014002.
[91] P.F. Felzenszwalb, R.B. Girshick, D. McAllester, D. Ramanan, Object detection
with discriminatively trained part-based models, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 32 (9) (2010) 1627每1645.
[92] K. Murphy, A. Torralba, D. Eaton, W. Freeman, Object detection and
localization using local and global
features,
in: Toward Category-Level
Object Recognition, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2006, pp. 382每400.
[93] C.H. Lampert, M.B. Blaschko, T. Hofmann, Beyond sliding windows: object
localization by efcient subwindow search, in: IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2008, CVPR 2008, IEEE, 2008, pp. 1每8.
[94] J.M. Stellman, Encyclopaedia of occupational health and safety, International
Labour Organization, 1998.
[95] J. Irizarry, M. Gheisari, B.N. Walker, Usability assessment of drone technology
as safety inspection tools, J. Inform. Technol. Constr. (ITcon) 17 (2012) 194每
212.
[96] C.P. Papageorgiou, M. Oren, T. Poggio, A general
framework for object
detection, in: Sixth International Conference on Computer vision, 1998, IEEE,
1998, pp. 555每562.

