Computer vision for assistive technologies 


a National Research Council - Institute of Applied Sciences and Intelligent Systems, Italy 
b University of Southern California, USA 
c University of California San Diego, USA 
d Carnegie Mellon University, USA 
e University of Catania, Italy 

article

info


Article history: 
Received 17 April 2015 
Revised 1 September 2016 
Accepted 2 September 2016 
Available online 6 September 2016 

Keywords: 
Computer vision 
Assistive technologies 


abstract 

In the last decades there has been a tremendous increase in demand for Assistive Technologies (AT) useful 
to overcome functional limitations of individuals and to improve their quality of life. As a consequence, 
different research papers addressing the development of assistive technologies have appeared into the 
literature pushing the need to organize and categorize them taking into account the application assistive 
aims. Several surveys address the categorization problem for works concerning a specic need, hence 
giving the overview on the state of the art technologies supporting the related function for the individual. 
Unfortunately, this ※user-need oriented§ way of categorization considers each technology as a whole and 
then a deep and critical explanation of the technical knowledge used to build the operative tasks as 
well as a discussion on their cross-contextual applicability is completely missing making thus existing 
surveys unlikely to be technically inspiring for functional improvements and to explore new technological 
frontiers. To overcome this critical drawback, in this paper an original ※task oriented§ way to categorize 
the state of the art of the AT works has been introduced: it relies on the split of the nal assistive goals 
into tasks that are then used as pointers to the works in literature in which each of them has been 
used as a component. In particular this paper concentrates on a set of cross-application Computer Vision 
tasks that are set as the pivots to establish a categorization of the AT already used to assist some of 
the user＊s needs. For each task the paper analyzes the Computer Vision algorithms recently involved in 
the development of AT and, nally, it tries to catch a glimpse of the possible paths in the short and 
medium term that could allow a real improvement of the assistive outcomes. The potential impact on 
the assessment of AT considering users, medical, economical and social perspective is also addressed. 

 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 

1. Introduction 

The term ※Assistive Technologies§ (AT), in the broadest sense, 
refers to any set of scientic achievements (products, environ- 
mental modications, services and processes) useful to overcome 
limitations and/or improve function for an individual ( Cook and 
Polgar, 2014 ). More specically AT aim at helping persons with 
disabilities or special educational/rehabilitation needs, to deal 
within their daily context and to achieve a better quality of life 
( Lancioni et al., 2012 ). In general there are two main application 
contexts in which AT are exploited: 1) the medical application con- 
text that tries to reduce (or rehabilitate) physical or cognitive im- 
pairments and 2) the social application context that operates on 
the surrounding environment focusing on social barriers and dis- 
criminations ( Hersh and Johnson, 2010 ). In the last decades there 
has been a tremendous increase in demand for new technologi- 
cal solutions allowing an improvement of the quality of life, e.g., 
for elderly people or people with different abilities, as well as 
for people without disease but willing to increase their comfort. 
Many researchers, working in different elds, have applied their 
knowledge to build advanced technologies in order to meet the 
needs of diverse AT＊ application contexts ( Bishop, 2014; Bourbakis 
et al., 2015; Dakopoulos and Bourbakis, 2010; Jo et al., 2014; Lan- 
cioni and Singh, 2014; Murphy and Darrah, 2015; Pawluk et al., 
2015b; Vel芍zquez, 2010; Vichitvanichphong et al., 2014; Vuong 
et al., 2015 ). As a consequence, works that deal (directly or indi- 
rectly) with the development of AT have proliferated in the lit- 
erature and therefore the issue to properly organize them has 
emerged. This categorization task has been then carried out by 
grouping the works dealing with the same area of user needs: 
e.g. dementia ( Vuong et al., 2015 ), visual diseases ( Murphy and 
Darrah, 2015 ), social orientation decit ( Bishop, 2014 ), activities of 
daily living for aged persons ( Vichitvanichphong et al., 2014 ), se- 
vere/profound and multiple disabilities ( Lancioni and Singh, 2014 ), 
physical and cognitive disabilities in children ( Jo et al., 2014 ), smart 
environments ( Vel芍zquez, 2010 ). This type of categorization could 
be dened as ※user-need oriented§ and it is the foundation of all 
the existent surveys concerning AT: they are very interesting and 
useful for readers (medics, patients, companies, etc.) who address 
the problems related to a specic need, hence giving the overview 
on the state of the art technologies supporting the related function 
for the individual. 
However in this common way of looking at the AT world, each 
technology is considered as a whole and a deep and critical expla- 
nation of the technical knowledge used to build the operative tasks 
is usually missing. As a consequence, the cross-contextual appli- 
cability of most of the underlying techniques and methodologies 
involved in each specic context is not considered and then the 
resulting surveys are unlikely to be technically inspiring for func- 
tional improvements and to explore new technological frontiers. 
To overcome this critical drawback, in this paper a ※task ori- 
ented§ way to categorize the state of the art of the AT works has 
been introduced: it relies on the split of the nal assistive goals 
into operative tasks that are then used as pointers to the works in 
literature in which each of them is used as a component. 
The potential usefulness of this new way to categorize the state 
of the art of the AT works can be easily foreshadowed by consid- 
ering that each technical task can be part of different AT dealing 
with quite different user＊s needs. For example object recognition 
from visual cues can be part of an assistive device for the indoor 
navigation for visual impaired persons, or part of an alternative 
communication interfaces, as well as a module in a social robot 
platform, and so on. Keeping this observation in mind, it follows 
that by collecting works dealing with the same task, regardless of 
the application context, it becomes easier to highlight the straight- 
ness and the open critical issues, allowing the reader to identify 
the research lines to be undertaken for an improvement of the ex- 
isting assistive technologies. 
Unfortunately, as already stated above, in literature there are no 
papers that use the ※task oriented§ approach and then this paper 
tries to partially ll this gap by using a set of cross-application 
Computer Vision tasks as the pivots to establish a categorization 
of the AT already used to assist some of the user＊s needs (Men- 
tal Function, Mobility, Sensory Substitution and Assisted Living) 
pointed by the World Health Organization. For each task the pa- 
per analyzes the Computer Vision algorithms recently involved in 
the development of AT and nally it tries to catch a glimpse of 
the possible paths in the short and medium term that could al- 
low a real improvement of the assistive outcomes. The rest of 
the paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 the most com- 
mon areas of users＊ needs are identied and, for each area, the 
list of the underlying relevant cross-application AT tasks involv- 
ing Computer Vision algorithms are pointed-out. In Section 3 , for 
each identied task, the analysis of the leading methods and tech- 
niques reported in literature to address it in any assistive con- 
text is given. Section 4 considers the assessment of AT consider- 
ing users, medical, economical and social perspective. A discus- 
sion about open challenges is then supplied in Section 5 where 
a glimpse into the possible emerging new solutions is also given. 
Finally Section 6 concludes the paper. 

2. Users＊ needs and related Computer Vision tasks 

The range of human needs to be addressed by AT is quite large, 
however, according to the Flagship programme 每 Global Cooper- 
ation on Assistive Health Technology (GATE), developed by the 

world Health Organization (WHO) ( http, 2015 ), most of them can 
be grouped into the following classes: 

1. Mental functions 
2. Personal mobility 
3. Sensory functions 
4. Daily living activities 
5. Orthotics and prosthetics 
6. Communication and skills training 
7. Recreation and sports 
8. Housing, work and environmental improvement 

Among the above human needs, Computer Vision has been in- 
volved to build AT supporting the rst four classes. The remaining 
classes have been otherwise addressed by scientic areas related 
to mechanics, electronics, computer graphics, signal processing, 
robotics, medicine, education, communication, material and build- 
ing science. In the following, for each of the users＊ needs in which 
computer vision can be considered as a technological support, the 
most relevant research ndings are indicated and the involved 
computer vision tasks are identied. Techniques and methodolo- 
gies involved in each task will be then detailed and discussed in 
the next section. In Table 1 a scheme of the relationships between 
user＊s needs and the involved computer vision tasks is shown. 
Mental functions impact the capacity of an individual to think, 
concentrate, react to emotions, formulate ideas, problem solve, rea- 
son, remember. Traditional assistive technologies supporting men- 
tal functions may include smart-watches, personal digital assis- 
tants and electronic calendars with alarm functions, voice guidance 
or graphic illustrations. Ordinary smartphones with internet access 
can also offer special user interfaces or applications to be used to 
support mental functions. Emerging assistive technology for sup- 
porting mental functions aim at expanding mental healthcare ser- 
vices by involving computer vision algorithms for the development 
of Socially Assistive Robot (SAR) ( Gillespie et al., 2012; O＊Neill and 
Gillespie, 2014 ) i.e. a robot that provides assistance to human users 
through social interaction ( Mataric, 1999 ). SAR research has been 
carried out to study its impact on a different mental health con- 
cerns (e.g., dementia, depressed mood, autism spectrum disorder) 
on groups of patients belonging to different categories (e.g., chil- 
dren, elderly). Socially assistive robots have already served in a va- 
riety of clinically relevant roles: Companion, Therapeutic Play Part- 
ner, Coach/Instructor ( Rabbitt et al., 2015 ). Socially assistive robots 
can take many different physical embodiments, including animal- 
like, machine-like, and human-like forms. The development of a 
SAR platform is a plethora of complex and multidisciplinary re- 
search areas and involve, among all, computer vision tasks such 
as visual self-localization and mapping (SLAM) in the environment 
( Meng et al., 2014 ), detection and tracking of objects (principally 
people), soft and hard biometrics ( Carcagn足 et al., 2015a ), human 
action and activity recognition ( Fasola and Mataric, 2013 ), head 
pose/gaze estimation ( Cazzato et al., 2014 ), recognition of facial 
emotions/expressions ( Medioni et al., 2007 ). The implementation 
of these functional modules allow the SAR platform to understand 
the surrounding environment, to react to its changes and to instan- 
taneously adapt its behavior to the identity, mood and/or level of 
attention of the assisted person ( Louie et al., 2014 ). Moreover, the 
robot is able to understand and control proxemics (the social use 
of environments) in order to employ mechanisms for communica- 
tion which are analogous to those used by humans ( Mead et al., 
2013 ). 
Aside from assistive mobile platforms, another interesting re- 
search area direct towards supporting mental functions, aims at 
analyzing human behaviors starting from visual data coming from 
environmental and wearable sensors. In particular, recognition of 
facial emotions/expressions and human action and activity recog- 
nition tasks are performed and evaluated over time through ad- 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

3 

Table 1 
User＊s needs and the relative computer vision tasks involved in the assistive technologies. 

 CV tasks 

 Mental functions 

Personal mobility 

Sensory functions Daily living activities 

User＊s needs 

↙

∣

Localization 
SLAM 
Object detection 
Object tracking 
Human activity recognition 
Biometric 
Head pose estimation 
Gaze estimation 
Image retrieval 
OCR 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 

x 
x 
x 
x 

x 

x 

x 

x 
x 

x 
x 

vanced machine learning and data mining methods. This area of 
research and technology development is sometime referred as ※Be- 
havioral Imaging§ as analogy to the medical imaging research area 
that revolutionized internal medicine in the 20 th century. Behav- 
ioral imaging provides ecient and objective measurements of 
behavior without the need of labor-intensive human observation. 
Moreover, it can be exploited to get real-time feedback that can 
immediately highlight the effectiveness of the ongoing assessment 
or therapy ( Rehg et al., 2014 ). 
Within this scientic eld, different effort s are also devoted 
to the introduction of technological intervention tools to improve 
emotion processing skills through realistic and exible stimuli. As 
an example, authors of Cassidy et al. (2016) described a method 
for the creation of near-videorealistic avatar, which can produce a 
video of a face uttering inputted text, with a variety of emotional 
tones. They demonstrated that general population adults can cor- 
rectly recognize the emotions portrayed by the avatar. Adults with 
autism spectrum disorders were signicantly less accurate than 
controls, but still above chance levels for inferring emotions from 
the avatar. Both groups were signicantly more accurate when in- 
ferring sad emotions from the avatar compared to the original ac- 
tress, and rated these expressions as signicantly more preferred 
and realistic. 
The use of detection and tracking of objects on mobile devices 
has been also used to superimpose digital content on physical ob- 
jects creating augmented reality that can be exploited to guide 
on object usage ( Damen et al., 2016 ), even through a robotic ma- 
nipulator ( Jiang et al., 2016 ), or to increase the selective and sus- 
tained attention of children with autism during object discrimina- 
tion therapies and elicit more positive emotions ( Escobedo et al., 
2014 ). A research area which is extremely useful to support men- 
tal functions is the one referred with the name ※First Person Vi- 
sion§ ( Devyver et al., 2011a; Kanade and Hebert, 2012 ). The aim 
of First Person Vision is to sense the environment and the sub- 
ject＊s activities and intents from a wearable sensor considering the 
point of view of the user (having this way readily available infor- 
mation about his head motion and gaze direction). Despite this 
kind of wearable computing has long history ( Betancourt et al., 
2015; Mann, 1997 ), it has become of more interest in the last years 
with the advancement of both hardware and software technolo- 
gies. One of the main application of First Person Vision systems is 
related memory augmentation ( Damen et al., 2014; Gurrin et al., 
2014 ) (e.g., how to use an object?) and life logging ( Furnari et al., 
2015; 2016; Gurrin et al., 2014; Ortis et al., 2016 ). In this context 
the representation of semantic concepts appearing in visual lifel- 
ogs is a fundamental step since the huge amount of data collected 
by a user over time (personal big data) ( Gurrin et al., 2014; Wang 
et al., 2016 ). 
Personal mobility , concerns the individual＊s ability to move 
within an environment or between environments, as well as the 
ability to manipulate objects. Unfortunately, some persons have 

the mobility functions compromised by impaired body functions 
or structures. Some technologies support mobility problems either 
keeping under control the movements of injured body parts or 
making more effective rehabilitation of the body functions. Two 
examples of this kind of technologies are the Baclofen pumps (that 
allow a person to control his or her spasticity) and the robotic 
therapy devices (who allow people to reduce impairment through 
repetitive movement training). These kind of supports are referred 
as ＆indirect＊ or ＆therapeutic＊ technologies. Differently, assistive (or 
＆direct＊) technologies are exploited to support the individual mo- 
bility by introducing advanced devices that augment the mobil- 
ity functionalities although they do not alter the impairment un- 
derlying the mobility loss. Cane, wheelchair or walkers and pros- 
thetic limb are examples in this specic context ( Cowan et al., 
2012 ). Another area of research is devoted to the development of 
low-cost and easy-to-use personal mobility technologies to evalu- 
ate the nominal value and the variability of spatio-temporal gait 
parameters (such as length of steps, trunk orientation, gait events, 
etc.). 
In this AT research elds, Computer Vision algorithms are in- 
volved in the innovative area of the prosthetic limb control where 
systems use image recognition to autonomously select the proper 
hand orientation, grasp shape and grasp size based on images of 
the object being manipulated ( Doen et al., 2010 ). The visual con- 
troller performs the detection and tracking of the object, mea- 
sures its geometric properties (size, shape) and automatically se- 
lects grasp type and aperture size appropriate for grasping the 
object. Computer Vision has been also exploited to build devices 
able to remotely measuring spatio-temporal gait parameters while 
providing visual video feedback. Measurements can be performed 
from data acquired either from static sensors or properly placed 
on board of mobile platforms able to follow the patient at a con- 
stant distance. In these case (people) detection and tracking can be 
effectively achieved by merging multisensorial data (coming from 
laser and infrared or omnidirectional cameras) or by using single 
or multiple cameras combined with the depth of the scene. In par- 
ticular the latter scheme has been introduced with the aim to build 
an affordable mobile analysis platform for pathological walking as- 
sessment ( Bonnet et al., 2015 ). 
Mobility rehabilitation is often needed after stroke, surgery, or 
degenerative diseases. It has to be personalized for each patient 
and the tools can be easily calibrated through smart interfaces and 
virtual reality. Advanced rehabilitation systems can perform hu- 
man action and activity recognition ( Zeng et al., 2012 ) using vision- 
based techniques which ensure natural interaction experience. The 
integration of vision-based interfaces with thematic virtual envi- 
ronments allows the development of novel tools and services re- 
garding rehabilitation activities ( Avola et al., 2013 ). Robotics Agent 
Coachers can assist people with movement disorders during the 
execution of motor exercises: this operating mode generally in- 
creases the user participation by exploiting the game-like interac- 
tions with the robotic agent and, at same time, allows up close 
human movement detection and measurement. 
Computer vision techniques, have been also exploited in the 
development of intelligent wheelchairs ( BrgidaMnica et al., 2015 ) 
making use of command interface that does not require the hands: 
the wheelchairs＊ software addresses problems like face detection, 
head pose estimation ( Rivera et al., 2013 ) and/or recognition of fa- 
cial emotions/expressions ( Sobia et al., 2014 ) for generating signals 
for interfacing with the wheelchair. Vision based autonomous lo- 
calization frameworks have been also used to make ecient nav- 
igation using a wheelchair: visual self-localization and mapping 
(SLAM) techniques have been used to calculate the wheelchair mo- 
tion and then to face the doorway passing regardless of its starting 
position ( Narayanan et al., 2014 ) as well as for the navigation along 
corridors ( Narayanan et al., 2016; Pasteau et al., 2014 ). 
Sensory functions : people with sensory impairments have re- 
duced ability (or lack of ability) regarding vision, touch, and hear- 
ing senses. The effects of a sensory impairment can range from 
slight to complete loss of ability to use the senses with mild or 
severe impact on daily activities. Assistive technologies support- 
ing sensory functions generally transform the characteristics of one 
sensory modality into stimuli of another sensory modality. Some- 
time loss of sensitivity in hands or ngers (e.g., due to peripheral 
neuropathy or other causes) can make it dicult or impossible to 
use a standard interfaces (as mouse, keyboard) and then alterna- 
tive interfaces are needed. In this area Computer Vision techniques 
are mainly involved to support blind or people with reduced sight 
persons. The past few years have witnessed an exponential growth 
in the computing capabilities and onboard sensing capabilities of 
mobile phones making them an ideal candidate for building pow- 
erful and diverse applications in this context. Robust and ecient 
object detection and recognition (that include also text detection 
and recognition for text-to-speech AT) can help people with severe 
vision impairment to independently access unfamiliar indoor envi- 
ronments and avoid dangers. Applications for forgery detection and 
value identication of banknotes have been proposed in literature 
( Bruna et al., 2013 ). The great advancements on text recognition 
( Epshtein et al., 2010; Jaderberg et al., 2014 ) has allowed to bring 
the classic OCR to the commercialized level. Nowadays the text can 
be recognized by wearable systems which are able to read for the 
user in uncontrolled settings (i.e., there is no need to perform a 
scan of the document with an external hardware and calibrate set- 
tings). A commercial example of wearable device for this task is 
OrCam ( OrCam, 2016 ). 
Computer vision technologies have the potential to assist blind 
individuals to independently access, understand, and explore the 
environments ( Tian et al., 2013 ). Visual Self-localization and map- 
ping (SLAM) techniques have been also used to estimate the 
ground plane ( Leung and Medioni, 2014 ): this can aid the blind 
in dynamic environments since it can be used by other high level 
navigation tasks such as obstacle avoidance, path planning, vi- 
sual SLAM and self-localization frameworks. A wearable system 
composed mainly by an RGB-D camera for indoor navigation sys- 
tem able to complementing the white cane, has been presented 
in Lee and Medioni (2016) . The system does not make use of a 
prior map or GPS information and exploit both sparse features 
and dense point clouds to get ego-motion estimation. Through a 
probabilistic mapping for path planning it is able to guide the vi- 
sually impaired user from one location to another making. The 
system also allows to store and reloads maps allowing this way 
to expand coverage area of navigation. In ( Chessa et al., 2016 ) a 
conceptual bio-inspired framework with identication and recog- 
nition capabilities able to provide early visual capabilities to im- 
paired people has been described. It offers multi-functional aids 
based on Computer Vision for scene understanding and waynd- 
ing. Also computer vision frameworks working in outdoor environ- 

ments to assist people in road crossing action ( Coughlan and Shen, 
2013; Mascetti et al., 2016 ), nding the walkable path ( Phung et al., 
2016 ) or shopping ( Chippendale et al., 2014 ) have been introduced. 
In this eld, another issue to be faced by computer vision is re- 
lated to soft and hard biometrics: the recognition of the persons in 
front of the assisted person (i.e. the possibility to have an accurate 
face recognition system) is an increasing demand from visual im- 
paired users ( Chaudhry and Chandra, 2015 ). A novel vision-based 
method to analyze the layout of a web page to facilitate access 
to web content for users with visual impairments was proposed 
in Cormier et al. (2016) . Another useful application concerns with 
the design, development and evaluation of wearable mobile read- 
ing devices that rely on robust document image analysis in order 
to identify the structure of the document ( Keefer and Bourbakis, 
2014; Keefer et al., 2013; Koo and Cho, 2010 ). Virtual environments 
can allow the users to interact with different virtual structures and 
objects through auditory and haptic feedback and they can help 
people who are blind in training themselves in familiar and unfa- 
miliar spaces ( Lahav et al., 2015 ). In recent years, lip event analysis 
in videos has been extensively studied because of its attractable 
applications including lipreading, visual speaker identication, au- 
diovisual speech recognition (AVSR), human computer/robot in- 
teraction, facial expression analysis and so forth. In particular ef- 
cient lip event detection approaches have been introduced: they, 
without learning priors, aim not only to distinguish frames depict- 
ing visual speech from those depicting visual silence, but also to 
investigate the lip-dynamic states of mouth opening and closing 
( Liu et al., 2016 ). Finally techniques to improve navigation out- 
comes for prosthetic vision users have been also proposed. Pros- 
thetic vision users often cannot interpret complex, uncontrolled 
scenes and then computer vision and image processing techniques 
can be used in some systems to improve functional outcomes 
( Horne et al., 2016 ). 
Daily living activities : In the last years, several research projects 
have been focused on systems for socio-medical services with the 
aim of introducing ICT technologies to increase context user aware- 
ness and improve his comfort, safety or independence while per- 
forming daily activities. The main aspects inuencing the percep- 
tion of quality of life concern possible degeneration of health sta- 
tus, safety and social life. As a result the technologies in this area 
must provide the following main services: general health status 
monitoring, indoor and outdoor localization, domestic environment 
monitoring and remote control interfaces. Health and safety status 
monitoring are generally performed by wearable systems equipped 
with sensors and electronics modules. Computer vision-based solu- 
tions have been also recently employed for safety and health mon- 
itoring: they address object detection and tracking, object local- 
ization, environment mapping and human action/ activity recog- 
nition from both traditional and depth cameras located into the 
environment ( Seo et al., 2015 ) or by considering rst person point 
of view ( Matsuo et al., 2014; Pirsiavash and Ramanan, 2012 ). Fall 
detection is one of the most faced health care issues and several 
computer vision techniques aiming at extracting human postures 
can be found in literature ( Feng et al., 2014 ). These approaches fo- 
cus on the analysis of the dynamic features (appearance change, 
shape deformation and physical displacement) that vary drastically 
in camera views while a person falls onto the ground ( Yun and 
Gu, 2016 ). Frameworks for assessing the quality of a movement 
from skeleton data have been introduced to support clinicians in 
healthcare, to monitor rehabilitation of patients or to identify mus- 
culoskeletal disorders ( Ho et al., 2016; Tao et al., 2016 ) . Recently, 
there has been also increasing attention in automatic eye blink 
detection for monitoring health (e.g., dry eye syndrome), for de- 
tecting face liveness or signs of sleepiness and for understand- 
ing some attempt of interaction from disabled people. In partic- 
ular, recent approaches based on motion vectors analysis achieved 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

5 

high invariance to appearance clutter such as glasses, head pose 
or facial expression ( Fogelton and Benesova, 2016 ). The last fron- 
tier in this application context is the design and implementation 
of multisensory platforms (e.g., in the form of a smart mirror) inte- 
grating different sensors, including 3D optical scanner, multispec- 
tral cameras and gas detection sensor, collecting multidimensional 
data of individuals standing in front of it ( Andreu et al., 2016 ). 
The goal is to enable users to self-monitor their well-being sta- 
tus over time and improve their life-style via tailored user guid- 
ance. A quite similar goal can be also achieved using mobile de- 
vices: for example in Marcon et al. (2016) the authors proved as 
mobile devices can fruitfully perform as an oral hygiene supervi- 
sor for kids. Food recognition is another emerging topic in health- 
oriented systems where it is used as a support for food diary ap- 
plications. The goal is to improve current food diaries, where the 
users have to manually insert their daily food intake, with an auto- 
matic recognition of the food type, quantity and consequent calo- 
ries intake estimation. In addition to the classical recognition chal- 
lenges, the food recognition problem is characterized by the ab- 
sence of a rigid structure of the food and by large intra-class vari- 
ations ( Farinella et al., 2016; Martinel et al., 2016 ). Others com- 
mon assistive technologies dealing with the improvement of the 
comfort of person in daily life have been introduced through nat- 
ural, creative and intuitive methods for communicating and by en- 
abling remote control of devices ( Rautaray and Agrawal, 2015 ). In 
this application context the exploitation of computer vision ap- 
proaches allows the assistive systems to handle complex activi- 
ties and to increase the possibility for the person to move freely 
and with a lower number of other wearable sensors. First Person 
Vision can be very useful in the context of daily activity moni- 
toring. Wearable systems able to suggest to the user how to use 
an object or that are able to perform monitoring, summarization 
and temporal segmentation of daily actions and contexts in video 
( Damen et al., 2014; Furnari et al., 2015; 2016; Gurrin et al., 2014; 
Lee et al., 2012; Lee and Grauman, 2015; Lu and Grauman, 2013; 
Ortis et al., 2016; Poleg et al., 2014 ) can greatly help to support 
users in their daily life. Moreover, computer vision based assis- 
tive technologies can be adapted to reect changes into the envi- 
ronment or to include new functionalities and, last but not least, 
they can satisfy anticipatory requirements with good accuracy 
( Forkan et al., 2015; Memon et al., 2014 ). 
Autonomous robots are also making their way into common en- 
vironments such as houses and oces to support daily living activ- 
ities of humans. In context the possibility to make use of real time 
Human Robot Interaction (HRI) systems (to allow user communica- 
tion with the robot in an easy, natural and intuitive gesture-based 
fashion) plays a central role and for this reason it is being deeply 
investigated ( Canal et al., 2016 ). As an example of advanced re- 
search outcome, a domestic assistive robotic system has been pro- 
posed in Mollaret et al. (2016) . Its main feature is that it only starts 
interaction with a user when it detects the users intention to 
do so (i.e., it is not intrusive). This is achieved by multi-modal 
perceptions which include user detection based on RGB-D data, 
users intention-for-interaction detection with RGB-D and audio 
data, and communication via user distance mediated by speech 
recognition. 

3. Computer Vision techniques involved in AT tasks 

In the previous section the most relevant technologies involv- 
ing computer vision tasks have been introduced for each area of 
user＊s needs. In this section, for each of the aforementioned com- 
puter vision tasks, a literature review of the leading methods and 
techniques which have been already employed to address assistive 
issues is given. 

3.1. Visual self-localization and mapping 

Self-localization is the computational problem of keeping track 
of an agent＊s location within a known environment. Localization 
is actually answering the question ※Where am I?§. If the agent 
moves in an unknown (or dynamic) environment, while locating 
itself, it has to simultaneously construct and update a sparse or 
dense 3D model of the scene while traveling through it. In this 
case the problem becomes more challenging and it is referred with 
the acronym SLAM, standing for Simultaneous Localization And 
Mapping, that is referred as visual SLAM when it is based on vi- 
sual inputs. Localization in a known environment is a well stud- 
ied eld in robotics and several approaches have been proposed 
in the past to address assistive issues. It is generally performed 
by using panoramic (commonly ceiling mounted) or perspective 
cameras opportunely positioned in the environment. In particular 
ceiling cameras are simple and cheap to implement, are not oc- 
cluded and provide a large view of the environment in one im- 
age. Ceiling cameras for SLAM purposes are commonly used in So- 
cially Assistive Robot since the on board camera resolution is often 
too low, as for example for the NAO 
1 platform, one of the world- 
wide most widely used robot for assistive purposes. Solving the 
problem of localization means to identify global coordinates in the 
2D plane and the orientation of the robot (i.e. the robot pose). 
The problem is often addressed by using probabilistic approaches 
that localize the moving agent with respect to a given map. Tech- 
niques such as extended Kalman lters (EKF), histogram lters or 
particle lters, often referred to as Monte-Carlo localization (MCL) 
( Rowekamper et al., 2012 ) are commonly exploited. The under- 
lying processing pipelines of the different SLAM systems share 
the same scheme. The camera motion is tracked using frame-to- 
frame matching or feature-based approaches and the pose updat- 
ing is determined by computing a relative transformation between 
a (partially) reconstructed world (i.e. the map) and a set of features 
or 3D point clouds obtained from the live camera. Frame-to-frame 
matching is, in general, inherently prone to drift whereas feature 
based tracking discards substantial parts of the acquired image 
data during the process of selecting relevant keypoints and, hence, 
is straightforward that the detectors and descriptors used in this 
process impact the accuracy of SLAM ( Schmidt and Kraft, 2015 ). 
The descriptors usually used for SLAM issues are Scale-invariant 
feature transform (SIFT) and Speeded Up Robust Features (SURF), 
even if other solutions are under investigation by the community 
(e.g. Space-time Gabor, 3D histogram of oriented gradients) and 
the nal choice is still being debated ( Rivera-Rubio et al., 2015 ). 
Features are extracted from the incoming images and then they 
are matched against features from the previous images. Then a 
set of point-wise correspondences between any two frames is ob- 
tained and, based on these correspondences, the relative transfor- 
mation between the frames is estimated using methods such as 
Random Sample Consensus (RANSAC) ( Engelhard et al., 2011 ). In 
order to speed-up the matching process, a Kalman Filter that com- 
bines the matching results of current observation and the esti- 
mation of robot states based on its kinematic model can be ex- 
ploited ( Nguyen et al., 2015 ). A recent approach considered the 
place recognition step as a classication problem and proposed an 
ecient search space reduction considering only navigable areas 
where the user/robot can be localized ( S芍nchez et al., 2016 ). Some- 
time ducial markers are used since they can be easily detected 
with low cost cameras ( Coughlan and Manduchi, 2009 ) even from 
wearable or hand-held cameras along crowdsourced paths ( Rivera- 
Rubio et al., 2016 ). Exploiting advances in imaging techniques, it 
has become quite practical to capture RGB sequences as well as 

1 Aldebaran Robotics, https://www.aldebaran.com . 

6 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

depth maps in real time making use of devices such as the RGB- 
2 and ASUS Xtion Pro Live 
3 which 
D cameras of Microsoft Kinect 
provide additional information of object shape and distance com- 
pared to traditional RGB cameras. These technological advance- 
ments have led many researchers to investigate the possibility to 
create a novel approach to SLAM that combines the scale informa- 
tion of 3D depth sensing with the strengths of visual features to 
create dense 3D environment representations ( Endres et al., 2012 ). 
RGB-D sensors are also used to detect ※visual noun§ features: sig- 
nage, visual text, and visual icons that are proposed as a low cost 
method for augmenting environments or for navigation assistance 
( Molina et al., 2013 ). On the other side, the use of RGB-D cameras 
increases the computational load and then more computationally 
ecient algorithms have to be introduced in the SLAM pipeline 
( Lee and Medioni, 2015 ). The most popular algorithms for visual 
SLAM are present in the Robot Operating System (ROS), 
4 an open 
source set of software libraries and tools for building robot appli- 
cations. 

3.2. Detection and tracking of objects 

Object recognition for assistive technologies aims can be 
broadly divided into two categories: 1) marker-based approaches, 
requiring visual tags placed on the objects to be identied 2) 
marker-less approaches which utilize more complex sequences 
of algorithms to characterize information such as the objects 
shape, texture, color, and other physical features (e.g., size) of 
the object to be identied ( Jafri et al., 2014 ). Marker-based ap- 
proaches perform recognition by capturing and analyzing an im- 
age of the marker which is usually designed to be simple to dis- 
tinguish from other objects in the scene (e.g., a square of a spe- 
cic color). Marker-based approaches require low computational 
power and storage space and they are ideal for tasks dealing with 
very cluttered scenes (e.g., identication of objects in room full of 
toys during experiments in the context of autism disorder). How- 
ever, marker-based systems require careful preliminary selection of 
markers and the correct placement of them on the objects. More- 
over visual markers have to be in line-of-sight of the camera, oth- 
erwise, they will not be detected. Furthermore, the visibility of 
these markers may be unappealing from an aesthetic perspective. 
These limitations can be overcome using marker-less approaches. 
From a more technical point of view the algorithms dealing with 
marker-less object detection and tracking can be roughly divided 
into two subcategories. In the rst one, tracking is performed by 
detecting an object frame by frame (traking by detection). In the 
second subcategory, after the detection (based on a priori model 
representation of the objects) the tracking is performed usually 
on the basis of an object model that is dynamically updated dur- 
ing the tracking. Usually for the detection step, a variety of visual 
features can be employed to represent the object under consid- 
eration: Scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT), Speeded Up Ro- 
bust Features (SURF), Edge/Corner, Gabor kernels, Wavelet Trans- 
form, random ferns, Binary Robust Independent Elementary Fea- 
tures (BRIEF), Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG), Local Bi- 
nary Patterns (LBP), Local Ternary Patterns (LTP), Census Trans- 
form Histograms (CENTRIST), Bag-of-Visual-Words (BOVW) ( Wang 
et al., 2014b; Yu et al., 2015 ). The design of the above local im- 
age features used for object detection make them robust to geo- 
metric and photometric variations, such as rotation, scaling, view- 
point and illumination change. Sometimes multi-resolution and 
multi-orientation approaches are used to improve detection ac- 
curacy ( Matusiak et al., 2014 ) but, unfortunately, these strategies 

2 www.microsoft.com/en- us/kinectforwindows/ . 
3 www.asus.com/Multimedia/ . 
4 www.ros.org . 

are accompanied by increased computational costs. People are one 
of the most challenging classes for object to be detected, mainly 
due to large variations caused by the intrinsic deformability of the 
shape and high variability in appearance. For this reason, a combi- 
nation of multiple features as well as motion features can be used 
to assure the detection performance required in an assistive con- 
text ( Diraco et al., 2015 ). 
Independently from the involved representation strategies, the 
model of an object is used to perform matching with respect to a 
dataset of examples, or it is given as input to a machine learning 
technique (e.g., articial neural network, Support Vector Machine, 
boosting, probabilistic approaches, decision trees, random forests...) 
after a training stage ( Wei et al., 2014 ). 
Semantic segmentation is another common way to address 
this problem. In the rst stage, every pixel is classied based 
on its appearance. The output of the rst classier in a spe- 
cic region around every pixel is summarized by a voting his- 
togram feature and given as input to a second classier ( Haltakov 
et al., 2016; Rav赤 et al., 2016 ). Interactive object learning meth- 
ods using scanty human supervision are alternative ways to han- 
dle unknown and dicult recognition cases ( Villamizar et al., 
2016 ). Multimodal applications which combine RFID with visual 
cues of the objects have been also proposed with the aim of en- 
hancing the ability of the object detection and tracking systems 
( Jafri and Ali, 2014 ). Once an object has been identied in the 
scene it is usually useful to track it over consecutive frames by 
considering a set of keypoints as well as its appearance. Keypoint 
based (such as Kalman ( Takizawa et al., 2015 ) or particle lter- 
ing ( Yan et al., 2011 )), Kernel-based ( Thakoor et al., 2015 ) and 
shape-based ( Sivalingam et al., 2012 ) tracking solutions have been 
exploited in the assistive context. Finally tracking in egocentric 
videos has been faced in Aghaei et al. (2016) by introducing several 
features that help in increasing robustness even in photo-streams 
acquired by cameras with lower frame rates and narrower elds 
of view. It must be taken into account that object tracking in ego- 
centric photo-streams is a different problem from the tracking in 
conventional videos in several aspects. Conventional tracking facil- 
itates itself with the assumption of temporal coherence, while tem- 
poral coherence does not hold for egocentric photo-streams. More- 
over, in egocentric photo-streams, the appearance of the target as 
well as its position may change drastically from frame to frame. 
In addition, due to changes in the camera eld of view caused by 
body movement of the camera wearer, background modeling be- 
comes a more challenging issue. 

3.3. Human activity recognition 

Human activity recognition from a sequence of images, ei- 
ther captured by RGB cameras or RGB-D sensors, is one of the 
most challenging topic in computer vision ( Tsoukalas and Bour- 
bakis, 2013 ). In the most common taxonomy, human activities are 
composed by a sequence of primitive displacements named ac- 
tions (if they involve the movements of the full body as in the 
case of walking, sitting, jumping, bedding, etc.) or gestures (if 
they involve the displacement of only one or more parts of the 
human body as for example pointing at objects, shaking head, 
clapping hands, head nodding, etc.). Many of the computer vision 
approaches addressing this problem, employ descriptors extracted 
from preliminary detected human silhouettes or human body parts 
(e.g., the upper body limbs and the hands) ( Delibasis et al., 2014 ). 
The detection and tracking of the human silhouettes and human 
body parts follows the general operative framework adopted for 
object detection and tracking (see Section 3.2 ). Recent trend in as- 
sistive human activity recognition research is the exploitation of 
low cost RGB-D cameras (e.g., Microsoft Kinect) which are suit- 
able for generating skeleton model of a human with 15 body joints 
positions and their relative orientations. Considering the skeleton 
features the human activities can be recognized ( Piyathilaka and 
Kodagoda, 2015 ). In general, once the human silhouettes or hu- 
man body parts have been detected, the recognition of human ac- 
tivities is then performed in three different steps: segmentation, 
representation and classication. In general, in the systems sup- 
porting human needs, the segmentation of human activities is per- 
formed using temporal sliding windows that can have xed or 
dynamically derived lengths ( Okeyo et al., 2014 ). The variations 
in the body conguration can be then represented with spatio- 
temporal features which focus on the representation of the shape 
and motion as a function of time, i.e. creating space-time volumes. 
The recognition of human activity is nally achieved by compar- 
ing the observed space-time volumes with predened ones that 
can be learned by training data or built using domain knowledge 
( Giakoumis et al., 2014 ). Common machine learning techniques 
used to recognize models of human activities are Support Vector 
Machine, K-nearest neighbor, Naive Bayes, Hidden Markov Model, 
Conditional Random Fields, Articial Neural Network and Decision 
Tree (DT) ( Tong et al., 2015 ). In medical application context, statis- 
tical approaches have been used to encodes the motion and posi- 
tion statistics of densely extracted trajectories from a video in or- 
der to recognize actions ( Iscen et al., 2015 ). In some studies, clas- 
siers are combined in different ways, thereby creating multi-layer 
or hierarchical classication ( Shoaib et al., 2015 ), whereas other 
ones proposed relational graph of visual words for activity analysis 
for smart home security ( Zhang et al., 2015b ). For gesture based 
interfaces, the precision (high true positives and low false positive 
rates) has to be assured while keeping the natural feeling of inter- 
personal communication. This can be achieved using graph match- 
ing where the nodes in the graph are assigned at different hier- 
archy levels, relative to their importance in the matching process 
( Li and Wachs, 2014 ). 
Assistive systems must assure reliability of the adopted activ- 
ity recognition models and therefore the model should also be ca- 
pable of detecting and avoiding false assignments. To this aim ap- 
proaches able to measure the reliability of the assigned action label 
by using a condence score to highlight activities with high or low 
condence have been recently proposed and applied into a smart 
home assistive domain Fahad et al. (2015) . 
Advances in wearable technologies are facilitating the un- 
derstanding of human activities using rst-person vision (FPV) 
for a wide range of assistive applications. For example in 
Abebe et al. (2016) a robust motion-feature (RMF) that combines 
grid optical ow-based features (GOFF) and video-based inertial 
features (VIF) has been tested using support vector machine as 
classier. Recognizing nger writing in mid-air is another useful 
input tool for wearable egocentric camera. Unfortunately it suf- 
fers from the problem of fast viewpoint/scale changes and then, 
to achieve this challenging task, contour-based view independent 
hand posture descriptor that serves both posture recognition and 
ngertip detection was proposed. As to recognizing characters from 
trajectories, a Spatio-Temporal Hough Forest that takes sequential 
data as input and perform regression on both spatial and temporal 
domain was used ( Chang et al., 2016 ). 
An even more challenging problem in this context is the early 
recognition of activities. Early recognition, which is also known as 
activity prediction, is an ability to infer an ongoing activity at its 
early stage and it is crucial, especially in the AT research eld, 
since fast reactions can be activated. The activity prediction ap- 
proaches model how feature distributions of activities change as 
observations increase. Integral histogram representations of the ac- 
tivities are constructed from training videos and then recognition 
methodologies extending the prediction algorithm to consider the 
sequential structure formed by video features are used ( Ryoo et al., 
2015 ). 

3.4. Biometrics 

Biometrics techniques can be largely divided into traditional 
(hard) and soft biometrics. Hard biometrics is aimed in recognizing 
unique and permanent personal characteristics of a person and, in 
the AT context, can be exploited to create personalized setups, re- 
strict delegation access rights as well as to discourage fraudulent 
access or impersonation of users. Moreover, biometric authentica- 
tion technologies facilitate the remote access to electronic health 
records for both patients and other stakeholders, and provide a se- 
cure method for encryption of personal data. The traditional au- 
thentication modalities involving computer vision are based on 
hand, facial or ocular image recognition ( Unar et al., 2014 ). Unfor- 
tunately, traditional biometrics necessitate of considerable user co- 
operation and the acquisition of the characteristic is intrusive. This 
is a drawback especially in the AT application eld since patients 
are often non collaborative and get scared when interacting with 
the authentication systems. 
Soft biometrics are human characteristics providing categorical 
information about people such as gender, ethnicity, height, weight, 
skin color, eye color, hair color and SMT (scars, marks and tat- 
toos). In contrast to hard biometrics, soft biometrics provide some 
vague physical information which is not necessarily permanent or 
distinctive. Such soft biometric traits are usually easier to capture, 
do not usually require cooperation from the subjects and for this 
are perfectly suitable for assistive contexts. Research on soft bio- 
metrics related to assistive technologies is still in its infancy de- 
spite the vast potential applications that range from the support 
to traditional authentication schemes to the design of agents able 
to successfully engage and interact with humans in an adaptive 
way ( Zhang et al., 2015a ). Soft biometrics modules working on 
RGB cameras concentrate on the human face since it contains a 
large amount of useful information for the scope. The most com- 
mon procedural scheme consists in a preliminary step that detect 
human faces by a Boosted Cascade of Simple Features (e.g. pro- 
jection on Haar Basis functions) eventually evaluated along multi- 
ple frames. The face preprocessing component is implemented by 
cropping the facial areas from images. The detected faces may be 
then downsampled to boost execution time and then the classi- 
cation of soft-characteristics is performed. In this research area the 
most used classiers are k-Nearest Neighbor (kNN), Support Vector 
Machines (SVMs), Bayesian Networks and decision tree which work 
taking as input either information extracted for instance through 
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Histogram of Oriented Gra- 
dients (HOG), Local Binary Patterns (LBP), local ternary patterns 
(LTP), active appearance models (AAM) or geometrical informa- 
tion extracted by automatic facial feature point localization (Gabor- 
Facial Point Detector, Active Shape Models, etc.) ( Bosch et al., 2015; 
Carcagn足 et al., 2015b; Salah et al., 2010 ). In alternative to facial 
traits, also 3D body metrics can be extracted from a number of 
networked RGB-D devices. Skeleton joints have been used in litera- 
ture to compute height, shoulder breadth, hip breadth, head length 
and the proportion ratios of person and also used for gender and 
age estimation ( Sandygulova et al., 2014 ). 

3.5. Head pose/gaze estimation 

The automatic recognition of the orientation of the head, even- 
tually strengthened by the more accurate estimation of the gaze 
direction, is crucial in a number of AT applications as human- 
computer interaction, autism diagnosis, monitoring of social de- 
velopment, depression detection and human behavior analysis. The 
most common used paradigms for head pose estimation are called 
Generalized Adaptive Viewbased Appearance Model (GAVAM) and 
Constrained Local Models (CLM). The Generalized Adaptive View- 
based Appearance Model has three main advantages: 1) the au- 

8 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

tomatic initialization and stability of static head pose estimation, 
2) the relative precision and user-independence of the differential 
registration, and 3) the robustness and bounded drift of keyframe 
tracking ( Mead et al., 2013 ). The Constrained Local Models follows 
the Active Appearance Model approach trying to model faces via a 
statistical description based on a set of landmarks. Shapes of faces 
are deformed iteratively according to the landmarks positions in 
order to nd a best t with the actual face image. Both GAVAM 
and CLM can be used with depth data ( Papoutsakis et al., 2013 ), 
despite the use of RGB images is often preferred. In the context 
of assistive technologies, mobile platforms have been also used as 
acquisition devices ( Anzalone et al., 2014 ). Starting from the infor- 
mation about the head pose, the Focus Of Attention, FOA (i.e. what 
or whom a person is looking at, sometimes referred as Point of 
Regard or Point of Gaze) can be also estimated. FOA is important 
for robots or conversational agents interacting with multiple peo- 
ple, since it plays a key role in turn-taking, engagement or inten- 
tion monitoring. In addition to the aforementioned applications, an 
eye tracking system can be applied to help people with severe dis- 
ability to manipulate computers or to pursuit ocular movements 
in the diagnosis or evaluation of diseases (e.g., multiple sclerosis). 
Approximating FOA from head pose creates ambiguities since the 
same head pose can be used to look at different FOA tar gets and 
this can become a limitation to reach a predened assistive goal. 
This limitation can be overcome using information about the lo- 
calization of the eyes and gaze estimation, enabling a more accu- 
rate FOA estimation ( Sheikhi and Odobez, 2015 ). In terms of the 
physical structure, systems enabling the localization of the eye are 
grouped into head mounted systems or remote systems. Other cat- 
egorizations could be considered taking into account wearable or 
non-wearable modality, as well as infrared-based or appearance- 
based information. Systems that operate remotely are more suited 
for assistive applications since technology providers cannot always 
rely on the user＊s cooperation. Most of the systems that work re- 
motely use an articial infrared (IR) light source that produces a 
corneal reection into the center of the pupil. IR based systems 
are very accurate, tolerant to head pose variation, and computa- 
tionally ecient but they have also drawbacks. Indeed, the harm 
of IR for human eyes have to be considered, they have to be cal- 
ibrated and/or have specic requirements for the imaging device 
( Topal et al., 2014 ). Appearance based systems operate, instead, on 
the images acquired by RGB or RGB-D cameras without any addi- 
tional hardware. They generally operate on images acquired from 
static cameras. The implementation on mobile devices of these sys- 
tems is a challenging task ( Amudha et al., 2015 ). The basic idea is 
to nd the face within the image and then locate eye centers us- 
ing geometric information (symmetry or curvature of the iris), the 
analysis of image gradients, the curvature of isophotes or a com- 
bination of them ( Leo et al., 2014 ). Finally combining estimates of 
Head Pose and Eye Gaze, it is possible to get the Visual Focus of 
Attention for HCI purposes, without any special needs in terms of 
hardware, or knowledge of internal camera or set-up parameters 
( Asteriadis et al., 2014 ). In the light of this, head pose estimation 
is becoming a key point for successful gaze estimation ( Ariz et al., 
2016 ) alleviating any assumptions of stationary head movement 
without requiring prolonged user co-operation prior to gaze esti- 
mation ( Cristina and Camilleri, 2016 ). 
After the location of the eye centers, the gaze direction is gen- 
erally estimated by either interpolation or 3D models. Interpo- 
lation methods use general purpose equations, such as linear or 
quadratic polynomials, to map the image data to gaze coordinates. 
3D model-based techniques, on the other hand, directly compute 
the gaze direction based on a geometric model of the eye ( Cazzato 
et al., 2014 ). 

4. Critical assessment of AT: users, medical, economical and 
social perspectives 

As discussed in the previous sections, the great advances in 
computer vision allow to obtain new and more powerful assistive 
devices and to improve existing ones, thereby increasing the po- 
tential benets that can accrue. However, at the same time, this 
fruitful evolving brings out the need to take proactive and sophis- 
ticated forms of assessment of AT. Critical assessment of AT is a 
not trivial process that can take a long time considering that there 
are several actors involved and that it is part of the iterative and 
incremental development process. The central components in this 
process are the end-users: the assessment of satisfaction of the 
end users is a critical step regardless the underlying technology, 
but it is particularly challenging in the case of devices involving 
computer vision tasks since the users benet of high level infor- 
mation that can require intermediate levels of interpretation and 
transduction which has to be assessed in their turn (for example 
a device to help mobility of blind persons can require a communi- 
cation device based on audio. It is not straightforward to separate 
the assessment of the functioning from that of the communica- 
tion modalities). It follows that computer vision based assistive de- 
vices generally require complex assessment processes and there is 
a danger that they become less accessible, with one of the greatest 
problems being that individuals stop using the devices (it was esti- 
mated that about one-third of all assistive devices are abandoned). 
The process of assessment itself is costly, given the number of pro- 
fessionals who potentially need to be engaged, and this issue has 
to be taken into account while dening the device development 
process ( Federici and Scherer, 2012 ). 
Recently, to investigate perceptions and self-perceptions of AT 
users, daily studies of groups of participants have being conduct- 
ing involving both people with disabilities and people without dis- 
abilities. The goal is to explore the types of interactions and per- 
ceptions that arise around AT use in social and public spaces. The 
preliminary results pointed out that AT form or function inuence 
social interactions by impacting self-ecacy and self-condence. 
When the design of form or function is poor, or when inequality 
between technological accessibility exists, social inclusion is neg- 
atively affected, as are perceptions of ability. These studies con- 
tribute a denition for the social accessibility of AT and subse- 
quently offer Design for Social Accessibility (DSA) as a holistic de- 
sign stance focused on balancing an AT user＊s sociotechnical iden- 
tity with functional requirements ( Shinohara and Wobbrock, 2016 ). 
In general, good design, usability and accessibility factors are 
undoubtedly needed for assistive technology to properly perform 
for end-users. Unfortunately these key factors are not sucient. 
Indeed, the user＊s lifestyle and aspirations have to be taken under 
consideration to get and consolidate a positive user＊s evaluation. 
This means that even a great designed technology can be poorly 
evaluated. This consideration has pushed the denition of a num- 
ber of complex frameworks for the evaluation of the assistive tech- 
nology outcomes. 
One of the commonly used framework to model the outcomes 
of an assistive technology is the Matching Persons and Technol- 
ogy (MPT) Model ( Fuhrer et al., 2003 ). The evaluation procedure 
requires both the provider and user to complete slightly different 
versions of forms, followed by a discussion of the results and ac- 
tion. This method draws on the medical model of disability. Start- 
ing from ※limitations§ on functioning, it identies goals and tech- 
nological modules that could be exploited by taking also into ac- 
count characteristics of the person (experiences and attitudes to 
technologies, degree of satisfaction with different aspects of life) 
and environment. This way the model tries to predict behavioral 
tendencies that could lead to inappropriate use or abandonment 
of the recommended technologies. 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

9 

Another relevant evaluation tool, proposed by the Consortium 
for Assistive Technology Outcomes Research (CATOR), considers 
a taxonomy of assistive products reecting combinations of user 
population, AT type, services, and context for use. It builds on 
the International Classication of Functioning Disability and Health 
(ICF) (WHO 2001) and is based on three descriptors: effectiveness, 
social signicance and subjective well-being ( Jutai et al., 2005 ). 
One more example is the SETT Framework aimed to promote 
collaborative decision-making for implementation and evaluation 
of effectiveness of AT for students (SETT is an acronym for Student, 
Environments, Tasks, and Tools) ( Zabala, 1995 ). 
As previously mentioned, the service provider and the end-user 
are not the only actors in the process of assessment of AT. Medi- 
cal perspective is another key factor. Medical personnel, including 
both doctors and care personnel, are more reluctant and address 
different aspects which need to be taken into account. This dis- 
trust of assistive technologies does not differ in the specied age 
and gender groups ( Wilkowska et al., 2010 ) and it can be, for ex- 
ample, based on the higher probability of false alarms (in case of 
remote monitoring) or in the feeling that a machine (e.g. a robot) 
can make at their place what they are skilled to do. Additional 
doctors barriers are low usability of technical devices, assumed 
diculties in handling the devices, and low technical competence 
which might be the reason for their view that AT are more time- 
consuming in contrast to the conventional approaches ( Ziee et al., 
2013 ). 
However, these drawbacks are almost overcome when using 
computer vision tools since, on the one side, the care personnel 
can directly check the actual situation through the image streams 
(false alarm can be then easily ltered without expensive ef- 
forts) and, on the other side, their use (e.g., in remote surgery or 
telemedicine) can be guided by graphical or interactive tools im- 
plementing user-friendly interfaces. As an example of recent in- 
vestigations about the different AT assessment of end-users and 
medics is reported in Oliver et al. (2015) . The authors proposed 
the use of RGB-D sensors in motor rehabilitation of patients suf- 
fering acquired brain injury and a qualitative evaluation of how the 
stakeholders of the proposed AT environment (injured patients and 
therapists) use and perceive the ambient assisted rehabilitation 
room was carried out. Three factors are then extracted and results 
demonstrated that acquired brain injury patients are more con- 
cerned with the aesthetic and operability factor than therapists. On 
the other side, therapists demand the protection aspect and reha- 
bilitation room more than others do. From this example emerged 
that the medical perspective has to be also included in the assess- 
ment process in order to achieve a careful and far-sighted planning 
of AT. 
Another aspect that plays an important role is related to the 
economic evaluation of AT. In fact, even the most developed wel- 
fare state systems allocate a limited amount of economical re- 
sources to provide AT. This implies that social services, health care 
and other organizations supplying assistive technology to individu- 
als must take operational decisions on the basis of accurate evalu- 
ations to ensure that all costs and benets are included. However, 
the economical evaluation is not a straightforward process since it 
involves both practical and ethical problems associated with some 
of the possible costs and benets, such as improvements of the 
quality of life and new or foregone opportunities. Sometimes costs 
are challenging to determine since can have high levels of uncer- 
tainty (costs may be hidden or not apparent until later) which 
make practically impossible an immediate and concrete quantica- 
tion. To bypass this bottleneck, it has been suggested to use mon- 
etary valuations of costs and non-monetary evaluation of benets. 
This is, for example, the key idea behind the CERTAIN study that 
proposed a model of cost-outcome analysis for assistive technology 
( Andrich et al., 1998 ). A practical way to make the economical as- 

sessment task easier is to focus cost-effectiveness studies on group 
of people with specic needs. This has been largely done for AT 
supporting people with dementia ( Bowes et al., 2013 ) but it is ab- 
sent for other groups of people. 
Finally, also social aspects of AT must be taken under consid- 
eration since there may be concerns: 1) about how the data ac- 
quisition devices may affect the privacy or freedom of a person, in 
particular in the case of computer technologies that rely on sharing 
visual information. 2) about the impact on society, for example, the 
fear that it may be used to cut back services and reduce human 
contact or that some devices may be used to do things a person 
is still able to do for themselves which may make their problems 
worse or that they may make things more complicated or beyond 
the abilities of the person or that they may help foster a one-sided 
focus on a person＊s problems and not on their existing strengths. 
In particular, the ethical and social implications of using computer 
vision are critical and require more in-depth study. It has become 
clear that the issue of acceptance of AT that rely on computer vi- 
sion is becoming more and more important and that it deserves 
a deeper discussion. More in-depth studies need to be conducted 
which explore stakeholders critical issues such as: determining the 
types of home monitoring technology that users would accept into 
their homes; in which daily life tasks such technology is accept- 
able; who will view data collected from such systems and during 
which type of circumstances. 
Furthermore, the ethics involved in developing and using such 
systems with potentially vulnerable populations needs to be stud- 
ied. For example, who makes the decisions for this population on 
when and how to use such technology? Questions related to the 
future of this technologies also need to be addressed, such as how 
will these ethical issues change in the future ( Mihailidis et al., 
2004 ). 
Summing up, more accurate studies are still needed to acquire 
statistically signicant data and then to get systematic approaches 
to quantify the key assessment factors of AT (acceptance level , 
cost and ethical implications) ( Lenker et al., 2013 ). Anyway it is 
established that, in the development of an assistive technology 
product, the user centered design practices take an important role 
( Pawluk et al., 2015a ). The opinion of the users for the determi- 
nation of the real needs during the design process through focus 
group and the assessment via preference surveys after an experi- 
mental session are useful to make the nal assistive product more 
effective ( Devyver et al., 2011b ). Participatory Action Design tech- 
niques ( Cooper, 2007 ) which involve stakeolders in the design pro- 
cess (i.e., users, care providers, industry, etc.) from storyboarding 
to nal real-world testing should be adopted to reach the assistive 
technology goals. 

5. Open challenges 

By analyzing the state of the art reported in previous section 
some still open technological challenges emerge. These challenges 
are explained in this section and, for each of them, some meth- 
ods addressing the underlying problems which have been recently 
presented in literature are briey discussed, explaining also how 
they could allow a real improvement of the assistive outcomes in 
the short and medium term. This discussion about present chal- 
lenges in AT and possible ways to address them needs to start 
from a more general consideration about what is happening in 
the articial intelligence community where deep learning (DL) is 
making major advances in solving problems that have resisted 
the best attempts for many years. It has turned out to be very 
powerful to discover structures in high-dimensional data and it is 
therefore applicable to many domains of AT. In addition to beat- 
ing records in image and speech recognition, it has produced ex- 
tremely promising results for various tasks in natural language 

10 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

understanding, particularly topic classication, sentiment analysis, 
question answering and language translation ( LeCun et al., 2015 ). 
Its very likely that assistive technologies will be soon the bene- 
ciary of this research trend. In particular deep-learning-powered 
computer vision has the potential to become the next major step 
in vision correction. Unfortunately, as reported later in this section, 
this desired road from laboratory tests to exploitation in real con- 
texts is rugged since research on deep architectures is still young 
and many questions remain unanswered. A few examples among 
many: DL takes advantage of large datasets which are not easy to 
build (methods based on pre-trained nets and unlabeled data are 
yet in their infancy) and, moreover, imperfections in the training 
phase make them vulnerable to adversarial samples. Another issue 
concerns the denition of the network model and the limited un- 
derstanding of the optimization process. For these and many other 
reasons, most of the challenges involved in AT need further investi- 
gation that has to go beyond DL applications even if, as reported in 
the following, DL paradigm has sometimes already been proposed 
as an appealing solution. In what follows, some of the weaknesses 
of the most used approaches involved in AT are highlighted and 
for each of them the most recent and attracting Computer Vision 
solutions on the horizon are pointed out. 
Going into details, concerning the self-localization problem, 
Monte-Carlo based approaches suffer in achieving long-term lo- 
calization since it involves several additional issues, like handling 
of variant environments, error recovery, ecient place recognition, 
possible sensor occlusions, repeated occurrences of similar features 
due to repeating structure in the world (e.g., doorways, chairs, etc.) 
and missing associations between observations. Moreover for large 
maps, the performance of pure image matching techniques decays 
in terms of robustness and computational cost. This shortcomings 
may be addressed using recent introduced hierarchical data asso- 
ciation methods that keep multiple associations per particle. They 
estimate a candidate pose using few correspondences between fea- 
tures of the current camera frame and the feature map. The initial 
set of correspondences is established by proximity in feature space. 
The initial estimated pose is then used in a second step to guide 
spatial matching of features in 3D space, i.e., searching for associ- 
ations where the image features are expected to be found in the 
map. A RANSAC algorithm is used to compute a ne estimation 
of the pose from the correspondences ( Gamallo et al., 2015 ). An- 
other possible way to increase localization performances could be 
the extension of Monte Carlo Localization method to 3D environ- 
ments using inexpensive RGB-D cameras ( Fallon et al., 2012 ). The 
use of a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) can bring functional 
improvement to detect specic objects and recognize their orien- 
tation ( Poggi et al., 2015 ) or to regress the cameras orientation 
and position ( Kendall et al., 2015 ). 
When performing SLAM, frame-to-frame matching approaches 
have experienced a large amount of drift that can be partially ex- 
plained by the fact that the visible scene is always very local and 
that only a rough intrinsic calibration was available. On the other 
hand SLAM approaches relying only on feature matching are less 
accurate due to their inherent sparseness. To overcome these limi- 
tations the dense tracking and mapping methods ( Kerl et al., 2013 ), 
the combination with the metrical information given by the robot 
odometry ( Bazeille et al., 2015 ) or the improvement of the estima- 
tion by means of the detection of moving objects thanks to a dense 
scene ow ( Alcantarilla et al., 2012 ) can be adopted, also with lim- 
ited computational resources ( Panteleris and Argyros, 2014 ). A re- 
cent attempt investigated if the awareness of ego-motion (i.e. self 
motion) can be used as a supervisory signal for feature learning on 
the tasks of scene recognition, object recognition, visual odometry 
and keypoint matching ( Agrawal et al., 2015 ). Although it doesn＊t 
work very well yet, one can imagine the effects of hooking this 
new strategy (perhaps trained with a lot more data?) into SLAM 

pipeline to obtain much more robust associations between neigh- 
boring frames or a frame with its nearest keyframe, than edges 
alone can provide. 
From the analysis of the approaches performing object detec- 
tion in AT domain it emerges that they nd diculties to handle 
the variations of the objects due to scale, rotation and deformation 
(especially when a person has to be detected). Active learning has 
recently emerged as a powerful tool for building robust systems 
for object detection ( Sivaraman and Trivedi, 2014 ) and can be used 
also in AT context. As an alternative multi-resolution and multi- 
orientation detectors can be exploited and the inherent computa- 
tional costs can be circumvented by a reliable prediction of im- 
age structures across scales that can rely on the assumption of the 
fractal structure of much of the visual world ( Dollar et al., 2014 ) or 
on the data-driven estimation of the likelihood that a region being 
an object ( Kang et al., 2015 ). Also high level image features can 
be used to represent complex real-world image by collecting the 
responses of many object detectors at different spatial locations 
( Li et al., 2014 ). Some recent papers propose also to use a large 
library of textured 3D object models (publicly available on the In- 
ternet) to implicitly represent both the 3D shape of the object 
class, as well as its view-dependent 2D appearance ( Aubry et al., 
2014 ). Semi-supervised learning, in which the training set con- 
sists of a large number of unlabeled examples and a small num- 
ber of labeled ones, are also gaining attention to this aim ( Sun and 
Savarese, 2014 ). Some authors propose the use of local and global 
shape descriptors in order to improve the accuracy in shape clas- 
sication and retrieval ( Battiato et al., 2015 ). Object classication 
and object detection have rapidly progressed with advancements 
in CNN and the advent of large visual recognition datasets. Mod- 
ern object detectors predominantly follow the paradigm in which 
rst an object proposal algorithm generates candidate regions that 
may contain objects, second, a CNN classies each proposal re- 
gion. Most recent detectors follow this paradigm and they have 
achieved rapid and impressive improvements in detection perfor- 
mance ( Zagoruyko et al., 2016 ). 
Concerning object tracking, signicant and rapid appearance 
variation due to noise, occlusion, varying viewpoints, background 
clutter, illumination and scale changes pose challenges to this task. 
Non-rigid object tracking, in which the object model evolves dur- 
ing the tracking process as the appearance of the object changes, 
is one possible solution to achieve good performances. This can 
be achieved by adaptive appearance models ( Babenko et al., 2011; 
Huang et al., 2015 ), kernel-based region covariance descriptor 
( Wu et al., 2015 ) or by exploiting contextual information ( Di Las- 
cio et al., 2013 ). Extending current deep learning architectures to 
the tracking problem is not a straightforward process instead. Any- 
way, a recent work has pursued attempts to use them for tracking, 
showing some promising results ( Zhai et al., 2016 ). In particular, an 
online object tracking algorithm based on deep neural networks, in 
which the network learns the probability densities of appearance 
of the target and its surroundings and updates itself adaptively to 
new observations was presented. 
Moving on to the task of recognition of human activities, the 
major problems are occlusions, shadows and background extrac- 
tion, lighting condition variations, viewpoint changes and, last but 
not least, the possibility that the same activities is executed differ- 
ently from different persons or even by the same person. To make 
the recognition more robust, the analysis of human gesture/action 
and behaviors has been recently faced considering a new perspec- 
tive, that brings in notions and principles from the social, affec- 
tive, and psychological literature, and that is referred as Social 
Signal Processing (SSP). SSP integrates Computer Vision and Pat- 
tern Recognition methodologies with nonverbal cues, like face ex- 
pressions and gazing, vocal characteristics, relative distances in the 
space and so on ( Cristani and Murino, 2014 ). 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

11 

Another possible way forward leads to vision-based systems 
combining RGB and depth descriptors: they have been already suc- 
cessfully used to classify hand gestures for a human-machine in- 
terface application in the car ( Ohn-Bar and Trivedi, 2014 ) or to 
describe the articulated human body that has a large number of 
kinematic joints ( Wang et al., 2014a ). Another relevant improve- 
ment in this research eld has been the proposition of the sparse 
coding-based temporal pyramid matching approach (ScTPM) for 
feature representation. Due to the pyramid structure and sparse 
representation of extracted features, temporal information is well 
kept and approximation error is reduced. In addition, a novel 
Center-Symmetric Motion Local Ternary Pattern (CS-Mltp) descrip- 
tor has been proposed to capture spatial-temporal features from 
RGB videos at low computational cost ( Luo et al., 2014 ). Additional 
researches focus on the evidence that activities are normally re- 
lated to the concept of interaction between a person with one 
or more people or between one or more people with objects of 
the surrounding environment ( Chaquet et al., 2013 ). Several re- 
cent approaches, on the other hand, are based on learning per- 
sonobject interactions and saliency maps in images, investigat- 
ing the possibility and applicability of identifying action-specic 
points or regions of interest in still images based on information 
extracted from video data ( Eweiwi et al., 2015 ). Another possibil- 
ity is to select a subset of discriminative frames from a video to 
improve the performances of detection and recognition of human 
interactions ( Sedgar et al., 2015 ). Finally, early prediction of on- 
going human activity has become more valuable in a large variety 
of time-critical assistive applications (especially related to heath 
monitoring). To build an effective representation for prediction, hu- 
man activities can be characterized by a complex temporal compo- 
sition of constituent simple actions and interacting objects. Frame- 
works for long-duration complex activity prediction by discover- 
ing three key aspects of activity (Causality, Context-cue, and Pre- 
dictability) have been also proposed ( Li and Fu, 2014 ). Deep learn- 
ing has the potential to have signicant impact on human activity 
recognition. Gkioxari and Malik (2015) extended this approach for 
action localization. Donahue et al. (2015) proposed an end-to-end 
trainable recurrent convolutional network which processes video 
frames with a CNN, whose outputs are passed through a recur- 
rent neural network. In this eld the state of the art is represented 
by the approach proposed in Rahmani et al. (2016) where a deep 
fully-connected neural network that transfers knowledge of human 
actions from any unknown view to a shared high-level virtual view 
by nding a non-linear virtual path that connects the views is pro- 
posed. 
Detecting predened facial feature points in a human face is 
a well studied problem but, unfortunately, it is still an open chal- 
lenge under unconstrained environments, with variations of illumi- 
nation, expression, head pose, as well as partial occlusions. Meth- 
ods which extract biometric measures using depth sensors dening 
a representative model and tting a 3D shape context descriptor 
within an iterative matching procedure ( Madadi et al., 2015 ) can 
be used to improve recognition ( Azazi et al., 2015 ). Alternatively 
facial feature points under challenging conditions can be located 
by enhancing the classication process, for example making use 
of probability outputs trained to provide the observation probabil- 
ity of each facial feature point. The problem can be then handled 
by maximizing the posterior which combines the prior and ob- 
servation probability. This approach has been effectively adopted 
within the framework of Bayesian Inference using Support Vector 
Machines with observation probabilities and distribution of face 
shape, which serves as the prior, that are both approximated with 
Gaussian Mixture Models ( Wang et al., 2015 ). For detecting facial 
landmarks that remain invariant across head poses a fast cascade 
regressors (Z-face) ( Jeni et al., 2015 ) or a 3D Morphable Model 
(3DMM) combined with the Structure from Motion (SfM) method 

( Jo et al., 2015 ) can be also considered. Many recent works on face 
recognition have proposed numerous variants of CNN architectures 
for face recognition. However, large scale public datasets have been 
lacking and, largely due to this factor, most of the recent advances 
in the community remain restricted to Internet giants such as Face- 
book and Google ( Parkhi et al., 2015 ). 
Head/gaze pose estimation systems used for AT issues still have 
some shortcomings in computational eciency and precision. To 
overcome them, on the one hand, approaches that combine de- 
mographic recognition (gender) and behavior analysis (gaze) have 
been proposed in order to create a user-centered HCI environ- 
ment by better understanding the needs and intentions of its users 
( Zhang et al., 2016 ). On the other hand, more sophisticated algo- 
rithmic strategies have been investigated i.e. a new type of con- 
cise 9-dimensional local descriptors with Fisher vectors that have 
been introduced in literature ( Ma et al., 2015 ) to describe the head 
images. Concerning the estimation of the gaze direction an accu- 
rate and ecient eye detection method using the discriminatory 
Haar features (DHFs) and a new ecient support vector machine 
(eSVM) have been recently published ( Chen and Liu, 2015 ). En- 
semble methods to deal with the problem have been also exper- 
imented ( Marku et al., 2014 ). Gaze estimation models exploit- 
ing RGB-D cameras which rely on geometric generative gaze es- 
timation have been recently also discussed in literature ( Mora and 
Odobez, 2014 ). Perhaps the most promising approach is to train a 
machine-learning algorithm called a Constrained Local Neural Field 
(CLNF) to recognize gaze direction by studying a large database of 
images of eyes (even articially created) in which the gaze direc- 
tion is already known. Another possible way to improve computer 
vision based assistive systems could be the exploitation of mul- 
timodal inputs to combine information obtained from visual data 
with auditory and physiological signals and more in general with 
other signals acquired from sensory different than a camera (e.g., 
gyroscopes, accelerometers, etc.). An example of problem where a 
combination of the different signals can help to improve reliability 
of the assistive system is fall detection ( Mubashir et al., 2013 ). At- 
tempts to exploit multimodal information are already present with 
the aim at preventing risks for patients, by using multiple sen- 
sors providing real-time information on their status and activity 
( DemCare, 2016 ). 

6. Conclusions 

This paper focused on the computer vision components ex- 
ploited in the existing assistive technologies (AT). In particular, a 
※task oriented§ way to categorize the works related to AT is pro- 
posed starting from the consideration that the same computer vi- 
sion task (e.g. object detection) can be part of technologies deal- 
ing with quite different user＊s needs and thus, by grouping the 
assistive technology works dealing with the same CV task could 
help the reader to better identify the research lines to improve- 
ment of technologies. The categorization considers the list of hu- 
man needs developed by the world Health Organization (WHO) 
and the each Computer Vision tasks has been associated with 
the related assistive technologies. Eight relevant computer vision 
tasks employed in AT have emerged (localization, SLAM, Object 
Detection, Object Tracking, Human Activity Recognition, Biomet- 
rics, Head Pose and Gaze Estimation) and the related approaches 
in the assistive technologies literature have been summarized. Fi- 
nally the recent advancements of the considered computer vision 
tasks, but applied in others application domains, have been dis- 
cussed to make aware the reader about the new solutions which 
can be used to better accomplish of the user needs in the assistive 
domain. 

12 

References 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

+

Abebe, G. , Cavallaro, A. , Parra, X. , 2016. Robust multi-dimensional motion features 
for rst-person vision activity recognition. Comput. Vision Image Understanding 
14 9, 229每24 8 . 
Aghaei, M. , Dimiccoli, M. , Radeva, P. , 2016. Multi-face tracking by extended bag-of每
tracklets in egocentric photo-streams. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 
146每156 . 
Agrawal, P. , Carreira, J. , Malik, J. , 2015. Learning to see by moving. In: Proceedings 
of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 37每45 . 
Alcantarilla, P.F. , Yebes, J.J. , Almaz芍n, J. , Bergasa, L.M. , 2012. On combining visual 
SLAM and dense scene ow to increase the robustness of localization and map- 
ping in dynamic environments. In: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE 
International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1290每1297 . 
Amudha, J. , Nandakumar, H. , Madhura, S. , Reddy, M. , Kavitha, N. , 2015. An an- 
droid-based mobile eye gaze point estimation system for studying the visual 
perception in children with autism. In: Computational Intelligence in Data Min- 
ing - Volume 2: Proceedings of the International Conference on CIDM, 20每21 
December 2014. Springer India, New Delhi, pp. 49每58 . 
Andreu, Y. , Chiarugi, F. , Colantonio, S. , Giannakakis, G. , Giorgi, D. , Henriquez, P. , 
Kazantzaki, E. , Manousos, D. , Marias, K. , Matuszewski, B.J. , Pascali, M.A. , Pe- 
diaditis, M. , Raccichini, G. , Tsiknakis, M. , 2016. Wize mirror - a smart, multi- 
sensory cardio-metabolic risk monitoring system. Comput. Vision Image Under- 
stand. 148, 3每22 . 
Andrich, R. , Ferrario, M. , Moi, M. , 1998. A model of cost-outcome analysis for assis- 
tive technology. Disability Rehabil. 20 (1), 1每24 . 
Anzalone, S.M. , Tilmont, E. , Boucenna, S. , Xavier, J. , Jouen, A.-L. , Bodeau, N. , Ma- 
haratna, K. , Chetouani, M. , Cohen, D. , Group, M.S. , et al. , 2014. How children 
with autism spectrum disorder behave and explore the 4-dimensional (spatial 
3d 
 time) environment during a joint attention induction task with a robot. 
Res. Autism Spectr. Disord. 8 (7), 814每826 . 
Ariz, M. , Bengoechea, J.J. , Villanueva, A. , Cabeza, R. , 2016. A novel 2d/3d database 
with automatic face annotation for head tracking and pose estimation. Comput. 
Vision Image Understand. 148, 201每210 . 
Asteriadis, S. , Karpouzis, K. , Kollias, S. , 2014. Visual focus of attention in non-cal- 
ibrated environments using gaze estimation. Int. J. Comput. Vision 107 (3), 
293每316 . 
Aubry, M. , Maturana, D. , Efros, A .A . , Russell, B.C. , Sivic, J. , 2014. Seeing 3d chairs: 
exemplar part-based 2d-3d alignment using a large dataset of cad models. In: 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2014 IEEE Conference on. 
IEEE, pp. 3762每3769 . 
Avola, D. , Spezialetti, M. , Placidi, G. , 2013. Design of an ecient framework for 
fast prototyping of customized human每computer interfaces and virtual environ- 
ments for rehabilitation. Comput. Methods Programs Biomed. 110 (3), 490每502 . 
Azazi, A. , Lut, S.L. , Venkat, I. , Fern芍ndez-Mart赤nez, F. , 2015. Towards a robust af- 
fect recognition: automatic facial expression recognition in 3d faces. Expert Syst. 
Appl. 42 (6), 3056每3066 . 
Babenko, B. , Yang, M.-H. , Belongie, S. , 2011. Robust object tracking with online mul- 
tiple instance learning. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 33 (8), 1619每1632 . 
Battiato, S. , Farinella, G. , Giudice, O. , Puglisi, G. , 2015. Aligning shapes for symbol 
classication and retrieval. Multimedia Tools Appl. 1每19 . 
Bazeille, S. , Battesti, E. , Filliat, D. , 2015. A light visual mapping and navigation frame- 
work for low-cost robots. J. Intell. Syst. 24 (4), 505每524 . 
Betancourt, A. , Morerio, P. , Regazzoni, C. , Rauterberg, M. , 2015. The evolution of rst 
person vision methods: asurvey. Circ. Syst. Video Technol. IEEE Trans. 25 (5), 
744每760 . 
Bishop, J. , 2014. Supporting communication between people with social orientation 
impairments using affective computing technologies. In: Assistive Technologies 
for Physical and Cognitive Disabilities, p. 42 . 
Bonnet, V., Coste, C.A., Lapierre, L., Cadic, J., Fraisse, P., Zapata, R., Venture, G., 
Geny, C., 2015. Towards an affordable mobile analysis platform for pathological 
walking assessment. Robot. Auton. Syst. 66, 116每128. doi: 10.1016/j.robot.2014. 
12.002 . 
Bosch, N. , DMello, S. , Baker, R. , Ocumpaugh, J. , Shute, V. , Ventura, M. , Wang, L. , 
Zhao, W. , 2015. Automatic detection of learning-centered affective states in the 
wild. In: Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces (IUI 2015). ACM, New York, NY, USA . 
Bourbakis, N. , Papadakis Ktistakis, I. , Tsoukalas, L. , Alamaniotis, M. , 2015. An au- 
tonomous intelligent wheelchair for assisting people at need in smart homes: 
A case study. In: International Conference on Information, Intelligence, Systems 
and Applications, July 6每8, 2015, Corfu, Greece. IEEE, pp. 1每7 . 
Bowes, A. , Dawson, A. , Greasley-Adams, C. , 2013. Literature review: the cost effec- 
tiveness of assistive technology in supporting people with dementia. Published 
by the Dementia Services Development Centre, University of Stirling . 
Bruna, A. , Farinella, G.M. , Guarnera, G.C. , Battiato, S. , 2013. Forgery detection and 
value identication of euro banknotes. Sensors 13 (2), 2515每2529 . 
BrgidaMnica, F. , LusPaulo, R. , Nuno, L. , 2015. A methodology for creating an adapted 
command language for driving an intelligent wheelchair. J. Intell. Robot. Syst. 
1每15 . 
Canal, G. , Escalera, S. , Angulo, C. , 2016. A real-time human-robot interaction system 
based on gestures for assistive scenarios. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 
149, 65每77 . 
Carcagn足, P. , Cazzato, D. , Del Coco, M. , Distante, C. , Leo, M. , 2015. Visual interac- 
tion including biometrics information for a socially assistive robotic platform. 
In: Agapito, L., Bronstein, M.M., Rother, C. (Eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 
Workshops. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8927. Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 391每406 . 

Carcagn足, P. , Cazzato, D. , Del Coco, M. , Mazzeo, P.L. , Leo, M. , Distante, C. , 2015. Soft 
biometrics for a socially assistive robotic platform. Paladyn J. Behav. Robot. 6 
(1) . 
Cassidy, S. , Stenger, B. , Van Dongen, L. , Yanagisawa, K. , Anderson, R. , Wan, V. , Baron每
Cohen, S. , Cipolla, R. , 2016. Expressive visual text-to-speech as an assistive tech- 
nology for individuals with autism spectrum conditions. Comput. Vision Image 
Understand. 148, 193每200 . 
Cazzato, D. , Leo, M. , Distante, C. , 2014. An investigation on the feasibility of un- 
calibrated and unconstrained gaze tracking for human assistive applications by 
using head pose estimation. Sensors 14 (5), 8363每8379 . 
Chang, H.J. , Garcia-Hernando, G. , Tang, D. , Kim, T.-K. , 2016. Spatio-temporal hough 
forest for ecient detectionlocalisationrecognition of ngerwriting in egocentric 
camera. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 87每96 . 
Chaquet, J.M. , Carmona, E.J. , Fernndez-Caballero, A. , 2013. A survey of video datasets 
for human action and activity recognition. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 
117 (6), 633每659 . 
Chaudhry, S., Chandra, R., 2015. Design of a mobile face recognition system for vi- 
sually impaired persons. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.00756 . 
Chen, S. , Liu, C. , 2015. Eye detection using discriminatory haar features and a new 
ecient svm. Image Vision Comput. 33, 68每77 . 
Chessa, M. , Noceti, N. , Odone, F. , Solari, F. , Sosa-Garc赤a, J. , Zini, L. , 2016. An integrated 
articial vision framework for assisting visually impaired users. Comput. Vision 
Image Understand. 149, 209每228 . 
Chippendale, P. , Tomaselli, V. , D＊Alto, V. , Urlini, G. , Modena, C.M. , Messelodi, S. , 
Strano, S.M. , Alce, G. , Hermodsson, K. , Razamahazo, M. , et al. , 2014. Per- 
sonal shopping assistance and navigator system for visually impaired people. 
ACVR2014: Second Workshop on Assistive Computer Vision and Robotics . 
Cook, A.M. , Polgar, J.M. , 2014. Assistive Technologies: Principles and Practice. Else- 
vier Health Sciences . 
Cooper, R.A. , 2007. An Introduction to Rehabilitation Engineering. CRC Press . 
Cormier, M. , Moffatt, K. , Cohen, R. , Mann, R. , 2016. Purely vision-based segmentation 
of web pages for assistive technology. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 
46每66 . 
Coughlan, J. , Manduchi, R. , 2009. Functional assessment of a camera phone-based 
waynding system operated by blind and visually impaired users. International 
Journal on Articial Intelligence Tools 18 (03), 379每397 . 
Coughlan, J.M. , Shen, H. , 2013. Crosswatch: a system for providing guidance to vi- 
sually impaired travelers at trac intersection. J. Assistive Technol. 7 (2), 131每
142 . 
Cowan, R.E. , Fregly, B.J. , Boninger, M.L. , Chan, L. , Rodgers, M.M. , Reinkensmeyer, D.J. , 
et al. , 2012. Recent trends in assistive technology for mobility. J. Neuroeng. Re- 
hab. 9 (1), 20 . 
Cristani, M. , Murino, V. , 2014. Socially-driven computer vision for group behavior 
analysis. In: Registration and Recognition in Images and Videos. In: Studies in 
Computational Intelligence, 532. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 223每256 . 
Cristina, S. , Camilleri, K.P. , 2016. Model-based head pose-free gaze estimation for 
assistive communication. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 157每170 . 
Dakopoulos, D. , Bourbakis, N. , 2010. Wearable obstacle avoidance electronic travel 
aids for blind: a survey. IEEE Transactions on Syst. Man Cybern. Part C 40 (1), 
25每35 . 
Damen, D. , Leelasawassuk, T. , Haines, O. , Calway, A. , Mayol-Cuevas, W. , 2014. 
You-do, i-learn: discovering task relevant objects and their modes of interac- 
tion from multi-user egocentric video. In: British Machine Vision Conference . 
Damen, D. , Leelasawassuk, T. , Mayol-Cuevas, W. , 2016. You-do, i-learn: egocen- 
tric unsupervised discovery of objects and their modes of interaction towards 
video-based guidance. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 98每112 . 
Delibasis, K.K. , Plagianakos, V.P. , Maglogiannis, I. , 2014. Renement of human sil- 
houette segmentation in omni-directional indoor videos. Comput. Vision Image 
Understand. 128, 65每83 . 
DemCare, 2016. Dementia ambient care: multi-sensing monitoring for intelligent re- 
mote management and decision support. URL http://www.demcare.eu/ . 
Devyver, M. , Tsukada, A. , Kanade, T. , 2011. A wearable device for rst person vision. 
International Symposium on Quality of Life Technology . 
Devyver, M.S. , Tsukada, A. , Kanade, T. , 2011. A wearable device for rst person vi- 
sion. 3rd International Symposium on Quality of Life Technology . 
Di Lascio, R. , Foggia, P. , Percannella, G. , Saggese, A. , Vento, M. , 2013. A real time 
algorithm for people tracking using contextual reasoning. Comput. Vision Image 
Understand. 117 (8), 892每908 . 
Diraco, G. , Leone, A. , Siciliano, P. , 2015. People occupancy detection and prol- 
ing with 3d depth sensors for building energy management. Energy Build. 92, 
246每266 . 
Dollar, P. , Appel, R. , Belongie, S. , Perona, P. , 2014. Fast feature pyramids for object 
detection. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 36 (8), 1532每1545 . 
Donahue, J. , Anne Hendricks, L. , Guadarrama, S. , Rohrbach, M. , Venugopalan, S. , 
Saenko, K. , Darrell, T. , 2015. Long-term recurrent convolutional networks for 
visual recognition and description. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2625每2634 . 
Doen, S. , Cipriani, C. , Kosti c, M. , Controzzi, M. , Carrozza, M.C. , Popovi c, D.B. , 2010. 
Cognitive vision system for control of dexterous prosthetic hands: experimental 
evaluation. J. Neuroeng. Rehab. 7 (1), 42 . 
Endres, F. , Hess, J. , Engelhard, N. , Sturm, J. , Cremers, D. , Burgard, W. , 2012. An eval- 
uation of the RGB-D SLAM system. In: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 
IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1691每1696 . 
Engelhard, N. , Endres, F. , Hess, J. , Sturm, J. , Burgard, W. , 2011. Real-time 3d visual 
SLAM with a hand-held RGB-Dcamera. In: Proc. of the RGB-D Workshop on 3D 
Perception in Robotics at the European Robotics Forum, Vasteras, Sweden, 180 . 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

13 

Epshtein, B. , Ofek, E. , Wexler, Y. , 2010. Detecting text in natural scenes with stroke 
width transform. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni- 
tion, pp. 2963每2970 . 
Escobedo, L. , Tentori, M. , Quintana, E. , Favela, J. , Garcia-Rosas, D. , 2014. Using aug- 
mented reality to help children with autism stay focused. Pervasive Comput. 
IEEE 13 (1), 38每46 . 
Eweiwi, A., Cheema, M.S., Bauckhage, C., 2015. Action recognition in still images by 
learning spatial interest regions from videos. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 51, 8每15. 
doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2014.07.017 . 
Fahad, L.G. , Khan, A. , Rajarajan, M. , 2015. Activity recognition in smart homes with 
self verication of assignments. Neurocomputing 149, 1286每1298 . 
Fallon, M.F. , Johannsson, H. , Leonard, J.J. , 2012. Ecient scene simulation for robust 
monte carlo localization using an RGB-D camera. In: Robotics and Automation 
(ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1663每1670 . 
Farinella, G.M. , Allegra, D. , Moltisanti, M. , Stanco, F. , Battiato, S. , 2016. Retrieval and 
classication of food images. Comput. Biol. Med. 77, 23每39 . 
Fasola, J. , Mataric, M. , 2013. A socially assistive robot exercise coach for the elderly. 
J. Hum. Rob. Interact. 2 (2), 3每32 . 
Federici, S. , Scherer, M. , 2012. Assistive Technology Assessment Handbook. CRC 
Press . 
Feng, W. , Liu, R. , Zhu, M. , 2014. Fall detection for elderly person care in a vi- 
sion-based home surveillance environment using a monocular camera. Signal 
Image Video Process. 8 (6), 1129每1138 . 
Fogelton, A. , Benesova, W. , 2016. Eye blink detection based on motion vectors anal- 
ysis. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 23每33 . 
Forkan, A.R.M. , Khalil, I. , Tari, Z. , Foufou, S. , Bouras, A. , 2015. A context-aware ap- 
proach for long-term behavioural change detection and abnormality prediction 
in ambient assisted living. Pattern Recognit. 48 (3), 628每641 . 
Fuhrer, M. , Jutai, J. , Scherer, M. , DeRuyter, F. , 2003. A framework for the conceptual 
modelling of assistive technology device outcomes. Disability Rehab. 25 (22), 
1243每1251 . 
Furnari, A. , Farinella, G.M. , Battiato, S. , 2015. Recognizing personal contexts from 
egocentric images. In: International Workshop on Assistive Computer Vision and 
Robotics - IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshop (IC- 
CVW), pp. 393每401 . 
Furnari, A. , Farinella, G.M. , Battiato, S. , 2016. Temporal segmentation of egocentric 
videos to highlight personal locations of interest. In: International Workshop 
on Egocentric Perception, Interacion, and Computing - European Conference on 
Computer Vision Workshop . 
Gamallo, C. , Mucientes, M. , Regueiro, C.V. , 2015. Omnidirectional visual slam under 
severe occlusions. Robot. Auton. Syst. 65, 76每87 . 
Giakoumis, D. , Stavropoulos, G. , Kikidis, D. , Vasileiadis, M. , Votis, K. , Tzovaras, D. , 
2014. Recognizing daily activities in realistic environments through depth-based 
user tracking and hidden conditional random elds for MCI/AD support. In: 
Computer Vision-ECCV 2014 Workshops, pp. 822每838 . 
Gillespie, A. , Best, C. , O＊Neill, B. , 2012. Cognitive function and assistive technology 
for cognition: a systematic review. J. Int. Neuropsychol. Soc. 18 (01), 1每19 . 
Gkioxari, G. , Malik, J. , 2015. Finding action tubes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Con- 
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 759每768 . 
Gurrin, C. , Smeaton, A.F. , Doherty, A.R. , 2014. Lifelogging: personal big data. Found. 
Trends Inf. Retrieval 8 (1), 1每125 . 
Haltakov, V. , Unger, C. , Ilic, S. , 2016. Geodesic pixel neighborhoods for 2d and 3d 
scene understanding. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 164每180 . 
Hersh, M. , Johnson, M.A. , 2010. Assistive Technology for Visually Impaired and Blind 
People. Springer Science & Business Media . 
Ho, E.S. , Chan, L.C. , Chan, D.C. , Shum, H.P. , Cheung, Y.-M. , Yuen, P.C. , 2016. Improving 
posture classication accuracy for depth sensor-based human activity monitor- 
ing in smart environments. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 97每110 . 
Horne, L. , Alvarez, J. , McCarthy, C. , Salzmann, M. , Barnes, N. , 2016. Semantic labeling 
for prosthetic vision. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 113每125 . 
Geneva: World Health Organization Concept Note: Opening the GATE for Assistive 
Health Technology: Shifting the paradigm. 2015. WHO, http://www.who.int/ . 
Huang, G. , Pun, C.-M. , Lin, C. , Zhou, Y. , 2015. Non-rigid visual object tracking using 
user-dened marker and gaussian kernel. Multimedia Tools Appl. 1每20 . 
Iscen, A. , Wang, Y. , Duygulu, P. , Hauptmann, A. , 2015. Snippet based trajectory 
statistics histograms for assistive technologies. In: Agapito, L., Bronstein, M.M., 
Rother, C. (Eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops. In: Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, 8928. Springer International Publishing, pp. 3每16 . 
Jaderberg, M., Simonyan, K., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., 2014. Reading text in the 
wild with convolutional neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.1842 . 
Jafri, R. , Ali, S. , 2014. A multimodal tabletbased application for the visually impaired 
for detecting and recognizing objects in a home environment. In: Miesen- 
berger, K., Fels, D., Archambault, D., Pez, P., Zagler, W. (Eds.), Computers Help- 
ing People with Special Needs. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8547. 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 356每359 . 
Jafri, R. , Ali, S.A. , Arabnia, H.R. , Fatima, S. , 2014. Computer vision-based object recog- 
nition for the visually impaired in an indoors environment: a survey. Visual 
Comput. 30 (11), 1197每1222 . 
Jeni, L.A. , Cohn, J.F. , Kanade, T. , 2015. Dense 3d face alignment from 2d videos in 
real-time. In: 2015 11th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on Auto- 
matic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG) . 
Jiang, H. , Zhang, T. , Wachs, J.P. , Duerstock, B.S. , 2016. Enhanced control of a 
wheelchair-mounted robotic manipulator using 3-d vision and multimodal in- 
teraction. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 21每31 . 
Jo, H.S. , Tsun, M.T.K. , Theng, L.B. , Hui, P.T.H. , 2014. Robotics for assisting children 
with physical and cognitive disabilities. Assistive Technol. Phys. Cognit. Disabil- 
ities 78 . 

Jo, J. , Choi, H. , Kim, I.-J. , Kim, J. , 2015. Single-view-based 3d facial reconstruction 
method robust against pose variations. Pattern Recognit. 48 (1), 73每85 . 
Jutai, J.W. , Fuhrer, M.J. , Demers, L. , Scherer, M.J. , DeRuyter, F. , 2005. Toward a taxon- 
omy of assistive technology device outcomes. Am. J. Phys. Med. Rehab. 84 (4), 
294每302 . 
Kanade, T. , Hebert, M. , 2012. First-person vision. Proc. IEEE 100 (8), 2442每2453 . 
Kang, H. , Hebert, M. , Efros, A. , Kanade, T. , 2015. Data-driven objectness. Pattern Anal. 
Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 37 (1), 189每195 . 
Keefer, R. , Bourbakis, N. , 2014. From image to XML: monitoring a page layout anal- 
ysis approach for the visually impaired. Int. J. Monit. Surveillance Technol. Res. 
2 (1), 22每43 . 
Keefer, R. , Liu, Y. , Bourbakis, N. , 2013. The development and evaluation of an eye- 
s-free interaction model for mobile reading devices. IEEE Trans. Hum. Mach. 
Syst. 43 (1), 76每91 . 
Kendall, A. , Grimes, M. , Cipolla, R. , 2015. Posenet: a convolutional network for re- 
al-time 6-DOFcamera relocalization. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2938每2946 . 
Kerl, C. , Sturm, J. , Cremers, D. , 2013. Dense visual SLAM for RGB-D cameras. In: In- 
telligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. 
IEEE, pp. 2100每2106 . 
Koo, H.I. , Cho, N.I. , 2010. State estimation in a document image and its application 
in text block identication and text line extraction. In: European Conference on 
Computer Vision. Springer, pp. 421每434 . 
Lahav, O. , Schloerb, D.W. , Srinivasan, M.A. , 2015. Rehabilitation program integrating 
virtual environment to improve orientation and mobility skills for people who 
are blind. Comput. Edu. 80, 1每14 . 
Lancioni, G.E. , Sigafoos, J. , O＊Reilly, M.F. , Singh, N.N. , 2012. Assistive Technology: 
Interventions for Individuals with Severe/Profound and Multiple Disabilities. 
Springer Science & Business Media . 
Lancioni, G.E. , Singh, N.N. , 2014. Assistive Technologies for People with Diverse Abil- 
ities. Springer . 
LeCun, Y. , Bengio, Y. , Hinton, G. , 2015. Deep learning. Nature 521 (7553), 436每4 4 4 . 
Lee, Y. , Medioni, G. , 2015. Wearable RGBD indoor navigation system for the blind. 
In: Agapito, L., Bronstein, M.M., Rother, C. (Eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 
Workshops. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 8927. Springer International 
Publishing, pp. 493每508 . 
Lee, Y.H. , Medioni, G. , 2016. RGB-D camera based wearable navigation system for 
the visually impaired. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 3每20 . 
Lee, Y.J. , Ghosh, J. , Grauman, K. , 2012. Discovering important people and objects for 
egocentric video summarization. In: IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, pp. 1346每1353 . 
Lee, Y.J. , Grauman, K. , 2015. Predicting important objects for egocentric video sum- 
marization. Int. J. Comput. Vision 114 (1) . 
Lenker, J.A., Harris, F., Taugher, M., Smith, R.O., 2013. Consumer perspectives on 
assistive technology outcomes. Disability Rehab. 8 (5), 373每380. doi: 10.3109/ 
17483107.2012.749429 . 
Leo, M. , Cazzato, D. , De Marco, T. , Distante, C. , 2014. Unsupervised eye pupil lo- 
calization through differential geometry and local self-similarity matching. PloS 
One 9 (8), e102829 . 
Leung, T.-S. , Medioni, G. , 2014. Visual navigation aid for the blind in dynamic en- 
vironments. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 
2014 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, pp. 579每586 . 
Li, K. , Fu, Y. , 2014. Prediction of human activity by discovering temporal sequence 
patterns. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 36 (8), 1644每1657 . 
Li, L.-J. , Su, H. , Lim, Y. , Fei-Fei, L. , 2014. Object bank: an object-level image represen- 
tation for high-level visual recognition. Int. J. Comput. Vision 107 (1), 20每39 . 
Li, Y.-T. , Wachs, J.P. , 2014. HEGM: a hierarchical elastic graph matching for hand 
gesture recognition. Pattern Recognit. 47 (1), 80每88 . 
Liu, X. , Cheung, Y.-M. , Tang, Y.Y. , 2016. Lip event detection using oriented histograms 
of regional optical ow and low rank anity pursuit. Comput. Vision Image 
Understand. 148, 153每163 . 
Louie, W.-Y.G. , McColl, D. , Nejat, G. , 2014. Acceptance and attitudes toward a hu- 
man-like socially assistive robot by older adults. Assistive Technol. 26 (3), 
140每150 . 
Lu, Z. , Grauman, K. , 2013. Story-driven summarization for egocentric video. In: IEEE 
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 2714每2721 . 
Luo, J. , Wang, W. , Qi, H. , 2014. Spatio-temporal feature extraction and representation 
for RGB-D human action recognition. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 50, 139每148 . 
Ma, B. , Huang, R. , Qin, L. , 2015. VoD: a novel image representation for head yaw 
estimation. Neurocomputing 148, 455每466 . 
Madadi, M. , Escalera, S. , Gonz角lez, J. , Roca, F.X. , Lumbreras, F. , 2015. Multi-part body 
segmentation based on depth maps for soft biometry analysis. Pattern Recognit. 
Lett. 56, 14每21 . 
Mann, S. , 1997. Wearable computing: a rst step toward personal imaging. Com- 
puter 30 (2), 25每32 . 
Marcon, M. , Sarti, A. , Tubaro, S. , 2016. Toothbrush motion analysis to help children 
learn proper tooth brushing. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 34每45 . 
Marku, N. , Frljak, M. , Pandi c, I.S. , Ahlberg, J. , Forchheimer, R. , 2014. Eye pupil 
localization with an ensemble of randomized trees. Pattern Recognit. 47 (2), 
578每587 . 
Martinel, N. , Piciarelli, C. , Micheloni, C. , 2016. A supervised extreme learning com- 
mittee for food recognition. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 67每86 . 
Mascetti, S. , Ahmetovic, D. , Gerino, A. , Bernareggi, C. , Busso, M. , Rizzi, A. , 2016. Ro- 
bust trac lights detection on mobile devices for pedestrians with visual im- 
pairment. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 148, 123每135 . 
Mataric, M.J. , 1999. Socially assistive robotics. Science 3 (6), 233每242 . 

14 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

Matsuo, K. , Yamada, K. , Ueno, S. , Naito, S. , 2014. An attention-based activity recog- 
nition for egocentric video. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work- 
shops (CVPRW), 2014 IEEE Conference on, pp. 565每570 . 
Matusiak, K. , Skulimowski, P. , Strumillo, P. , 2014. A mobile phone application for 
recognizing objects as a personal aid for the visually impaired users. In: 
Hippe, Z.S., Kulikowski, J.L., Mroczek, T., Wtorek, J. (Eds.), Human-Computer Sys- 
tems Interaction: Backgrounds and Applications 3. In: Advances in Intelligent 
Systems and Computing, 300. Springer International Publishing, pp. 201每212 . 
Mead, R. , Atrash, A. , Matari c, M.J. , 2013. Automated proxemic feature extraction 
and behavior recognition: Applications in human-robot interaction. Int. J. Social 
Robot. 5 (3), 367每378 . 
Medioni, G. , Franois, A.R. , Siddiqui, M. , Kim, K. , Yoon, H. , 2007. Robust real-time 
vision for a personal service robot. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 108 (1), 
196每203 . 
Memon, M. , Wagner, S.R. , Pedersen, C.F. , Beevi, F.H.A. , Hansen, F.O. , 2014. Ambi- 
ent assisted living healthcare frameworks, platforms, standards, and quality at- 
tributes. Sensors 14 (3), 4312每4341 . 
Meng, L. , De Silva, C. , Zhang, J. , 2014. 3d visual SLAM for an assistive robot in indoor 
environments using RGB-D cameras. In: Computer Science Education (ICCSE), 
2014 9th International Conference on, pp. 32每37 . 
Mihailidis, A. , Carmichael, B. , Boger, J. , 2004. The use of computer vision in an intel- 
ligent environment to support aging-in-place, safety, and independence in the 
home. Inf. Technol. Biomed. IEEE Trans. 8 (3), 238每247 . 
Molina, E. , Diallo, A. , Zhu, Z. , 2013. Visual noun navigation framework for the blind. 
J. Assistive Technol. 7 (2), 118每130 . 
Mollaret, C. , Mekonnen, A .A . , Lerasle, F. , Ferran谷, I. , Pinquier, J. , Boudet, B. , 
Rumeau, P. , 2016. A multi-modal perception based assistive robotic system for 
the elderly. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 78每97 . 
Mora, K.A.F. , Odobez, J.-M. , 2014. Geometric generative gaze estimation (g3e) for 
remote RGB-D cameras. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 
2014 IEEE Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1773每1780 . 
Mubashir, M. , Shao, L. , Seed, L. , 2013. A survey on fall detection: principles and ap- 
proaches. Neurocomputing 100, 144每152 . 
Murphy, K. , Darrah, M. , 2015. Haptics-based apps for middle school students with 
visual impairments. IEEE Trans. Haptics 8 (3), 318每326 . 
Narayanan, V.K. , Pasteau, F. , Babel, M. , Chaumette, F. , 2014. Visual servoing for au- 
tonomous doorway passing in a wheelchair using a single doorpost. IEEE/RSJ 
IROS Workshop on Assistance and Service Robotics in a Human Environment, 
ASROB . 
Narayanan, V.K. , Pasteau, F. , Marchal, M. , Krupa, A. , Babel, M. , 2016. Vision-based 
adaptive assistance and haptic guidance for safe wheelchair corridor following. 
Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 171每185 . 
Nguyen, Q.-H. , Vu, H. , Tran, T.-H. , Van Hamme, D. , Veelaert, P. , Philips, W. , 
Nguyen, Q.-H. , 2015. A visual SLAM system on mobile robot supporting local- 
ization services to visually impaired people. In: Agapito, L., Bronstein, M.M., 
Rother, C. (Eds.), Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops. Springer Interna- 
tional Publishing, pp. 716每729 . 
Ohn-Bar, E. , Trivedi, M. , 2014. Hand gesture recognition in real time for automotive 
interfaces: a multimodal vision-based approach and evaluations. Intell. Transp. 
Syst. IEEE Trans. 15 (6), 2368每2377 . 
Okeyo, G. , Chen, L. , Wang, H. , Sterritt, R. , 2014. Dynamic sensor data segmentation 
for real-time knowledge-driven activity recognition. Pervasive Mobile Comput. 
10 (Part B), 155每172 . 
Oliver, M. , Montero, F. , Fernndez-Caballero, A. , Gonzlez, P. , Molina, J.P. , 2015. RGB-D 
assistive technologies for acquired brain injury: description and assessment of 
user experience. Expert Syst. 32 (3), 370每380 . 
OrCam, 2016. MyeyeURL http://www.orcam.com/ . 
Ortis, A. , Farinella, G.M. , D＊Amico, V. , Addesso, L. , Torrisi, G. , Battiato, S. , 2016. Orga- 
nizing egocentric videos for daily living monitoring. Lifelogging Tools and Ap- 
plications - ACM MM Workshop . 
O＊Neill, B. , Gillespie, A. , 2014. Assistive technology for cognition. In: Assistive Tech- 
nology for Cognition: A Handbook for Clinicians and Developers. Psychology 
Press . 
Panteleris, P. , Argyros, A .A . , 2014. Vision-based SLAM and moving objects track- 
ing for the perceptual support of a smart walker platform. In: Computer Vi- 
sion-ECCV 2014 Workshops. Springer, pp. 407每423 . 
Papoutsakis, K. , Padeleris, P. , Ntelidakis, A. , Stefanou, S. , Zabulis, X. , Kosmopoulos, D. , 
Argyros, A .A . , 2013. Developing visual competencies for socially assistive robots: 
the hobbit approach. In: Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on PEr- 
vasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments. ACM, p. 56 . 
Parkhi, O.M. , Vedaldi, A. , Zisserman, A. , 2015. Deep face recognition. In: British Ma- 
chine Vision Conference, vol. 1, p. 6 . 
Pasteau, F. , Krupa, A. , Babel, M. , 2014. Vision-based assistance for wheelchair navi- 
gation along corridors. In: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014 IEEE Interna- 
tional Conference on. IEEE, pp. 4 430每4 435 . 
Pawluk, D. , Adams, R. , Kitada, R. , 2015. Designing haptic assistive technology for in- 
dividuals who are blind or visually impaired. IEEE Trans. Haptics 8 (3), 245每257 . 
Pawluk, D. , Bourbakis, N. , Giudice, N. , Hayward, V. , Heller, M. , 2015. Guest edito- 
rial: Haptic assistive technology for individuals who are visually impaired. IEEE 
Trans. Haptics 8 (3), 245每257 . 
Phung, S.L. , Le, M.C. , Bouzerdoum, A. , 2016. Pedestrian lane detection in unstruc- 
tured scenes for assistive navigation. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 
186每196 . 
Pirsiavash, H. , Ramanan, D. , 2012. Detecting activities of daily living in rst-person 
camera views. In: Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2012 IEEE 
Conference on, pp. 2847每2854 . 

Piyathilaka, L. , Kodagoda, S. , 2015. Human activity recognition for domestic robots. 
In: Field and Service Robotics. Springer, pp. 395每408 . 
Poggi, M. , Nanni, L. , Mattoccia, S. , 2015. Crosswalk recognition through point-cloud 
processing and deep-learning suited to a wearable mobility aid for the visu- 
ally impaired. In: International Conference on Image Analysis and Processing. 
Springer, pp. 282每289 . 
Poleg, Y. , Arora, C. , Peleg, S. , 2014. Temporal segmentation of egocentric videos. In: 
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 
Rabbitt, S.M. , Kazdin, A.E. , Scassellati, B. , 2015. Integrating socially assistive robotics 
into mental healthcare interventions: Applications and recommendations for 
expanded use. Clin. Psychol. Rev. 35, 35每46 . 
Rahmani, H., Mian, A., Shah, M., 2016. Learning a deep model for human action 
recognition from novel viewpoints. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.00828 . 
Rautaray, S. , Agrawal, A. , 2015. Vision based hand gesture recognition for human 
computer interaction: a survey. Artif. Intell. Rev. 43 (1), 1每54 . 
Rehg, J.M. , Rozga, A. , Abowd, G.D. , Goodwin, M.S. , 2014. Behavioral imaging and 
autism. Pervasive Comput. IEEE 13 (2), 84每87 . 
Rivera, L.A. , DeSouza, G. , Franklin, L. , 2013. Control of a wheelchair using an adap- 
tive k-means clustering of head poses. In: Computational Intelligence in Reha- 
bilitation and Assistive Technologies (CIRAT), 2013 IEEE Symposium on. IEEE, 
pp. 24每31 . 
Rivera-Rubio, J. , Alexiou, I. , Bharath, A .A . , 2015. Appearance-based indoor localiza- 
tion: a comparison of patch descriptor performance. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 66, 
109每117 . 
Rivera-Rubio, J. , Arulkumaran, K. , Rishi, H. , Alexiou, I. , Bharath, A .A . , 2016. An as- 
sistive haptic interface for appearance-based indoor navigation. Comput. Vision 
Image Understand. 149, 126每145 . 
Rowekamper, J. , Sprunk, C. , Tipaldi, G.D. , Stachniss, C. , Pfaff, P. , Burgard, W. , 
2012. On the position accuracy of mobile robot localization based on par- 
ticle lters combined with scan matching. In: Intelligent Robots and Sys- 
tems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 3158每
3164 . 
Rav赤, D. , Bober, M. , Farinella, G. , Guarnera, M. , Battiato, S. , 2016. Semantic segmenta- 
tion of images exploiting DCT based features and random forest. Pattern Recog- 
nit. 52, 260每273 . 
Ryoo, M. , Fuchs, T.J. , Xia, L. , Aggarwal, J. , Matthies, L. , 2015. Robot-centric activity 
prediction from rst-person videos: what will they do to me＊. In: Proceedings 
of the Tenth Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Inter- 
action. ACM, pp. 295每302 . 
Salah, A .A . , Sebe, N. , Gevers, T. , 2010. Communication and automatic interpretation 
of affect from facial expressions. In: Affective Computing and Interaction: Psy- 
chological, Cognitive and Neuroscientic Perspectives: Psychological, Cognitive 
and Neuroscientic Perspectives, p. 157 . 
S芍nchez, C. , Taddei, P. , Ceriani, S. , Wolfart, E. , Sequeira, V. , 2016. Localization and 
tracking in known large environments using portable real-time 3d sensors. 
Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 197每208 . 
Sandygulova, A. , Dragone, M. , O＊Hare, G. , 2014. Real-time adaptive child-robot in- 
teraction: age and gender determination of children based on 3d body metrics. 
In: Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2014 RO-MAN: The 23rd IEEE 
International Symposium on, pp. 826每831 . 
Schmidt, A. , Kraft, M. , 2015. The impact of the image feature detector and descrip- 
tor choice on visual SLAM accuracy. In: Image Processing & Communications 
Challenges 6. Springer, pp. 203每210 . 
Sedgar, Y.S. , Vahdat, A. , Se, S. , Mori, G. , 2015. Discriminative key-component mod- 
els for interaction detection and recognition. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 
135, 16每30 . 
Seo, J. , Han, S. , Lee, S. , Kim, H. , 2015. Computer vision techniques for construction 
safety and health monitoring. Adv. Eng. Inf 29 (2), 239每251 . 
Sheikhi, S., Odobez, J.-M., 2015. Combining dynamic head posegaze mapping with 
the robot conversational state for attention recognition in humanrobot interac- 
tions. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 66, 81每90 . Pattern Recognition in Human Computer 
Interaction. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2014.10.002. 
Shinohara, K. , Wobbrock, J.O. , 2016. Self-conscious or self-condent? a diary study 
conceptualizing the social accessibility of assistive technology. ACM Trans. Ac- 
cessible Comput. 8 (2), 5 . 
Shoaib, M. , Bosch, S. , Incel, O.D. , Scholten, H. , Havinga, P.J. , 2015. A survey 
of online activity recognition using mobile phones. Sensors 15 (1), 2059每
2085 . 
Sivalingam, R. , Cherian, A. , Fasching, J. , Walczak, N. , Bird, N. , Morellas, V. , Murphy, B. , 
Cullen, K. , Lim, K. , Sapiro, G. , et al. , 2012. A multi-sensor visual tracking system 
for behavior monitoring of at-risk children. In: Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
2012 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, pp. 1345每1350 . 
Sivaraman, S. , Trivedi, M. , 2014. Active learning for on-road vehicle detection: a 
comparative study. Mach. Vision Appl. 25 (3), 599每611 . 
Sobia, M. , Brindha, V. , Abudhahir, A. , 2014. Facial expression recognition using PCA 
based interface for wheelchair. In: Electronics and Communication Systems 
(ICECS), 2014 International Conference on, pp. 1每6 . 
Sun, M. , Savarese, S. , 2014. Model-based object recognition. In: Ikeuchi, K. (Ed.), 
Computer Vision. Springer US, pp. 4 88每4 92 . 
Takizawa, H. , Yamaguchi, S. , Aoyagi, M. , Ezaki, N. , Mizuno, S. , 2015. Kinect cane: 
an assistive system for the visually impaired based on the concept of object 
recognition aid. Pers. Ubiquitous Comput. 1每11 . 
Tao, L. , Paiement, A. , Damen, D. , Mirmehdi, M. , Hannuna, S. , Camplani, M. , 
Burghardt, T. , Craddock, I. , 2016. A comparative study of pose representation 
and dynamics modelling for online motion quality assessment. Comput. Vision 
Image Understand. 148, 136每152 . 

M. Leo et al. / Computer Vision and Image Understanding 154 (2017) 1每15 

15 

Thakoor, K. , Mante, N. , Zhang, C. , Siagian, C. , Weiland, J. , Itti, L. , Medioni, G. , 2015. 
A system for assisting the visually impaired in localization and grasp of de- 
sired objects. In: Agapito, L., Bronstein, M.M., Rother, C. (Eds.), Computer Vi- 
sion - ECCV 2014 Workshops. In: Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8927. 
Springer International Publishing, pp. 643每657 . 
Tian, Y. , Yang, X. , Yi, C. , Arditi, A. , 2013. Toward a computer vision-based waynding 
aid for blind persons to access unfamiliar indoor environments. Mach. Vision 
Appl. 24 (3), 521每535 . 
Tong, Y. , Chen, R. , Gao, J. , 2015. Hidden state conditional random eld for abnormal 
activity recognition in smart homes. Entropy 17 (3), 1358每1378 . 
Topal, C. , Gunal, S. , Kodeviren, O. , Dogan, A. , Gerek, O.N. , 2014. A low-computa- 
tional approach on gaze estimation with eye touch system. Cybern. IEEE Trans. 
44 (2), 228每239 . 
Tsoukalas, A. , Bourbakis, N. , 2013. A rst stage comparative survey on human activ- 
ity recognition methodologies. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Tools 24 (6) . 
Unar, J. , Seng, W.C. , Abbasi, A. , 2014. A review of biometric technology along with 
trends and prospects. Pattern Recognit. 47 (8), 2673每2688 . 
Vel芍zquez, R. , 2010. Wearable assistive devices for the blind. In: Wearable and Au- 
tonomous Biomedical Devices and Systems for Smart Environment. Springer, 
pp. 331每349 . 
Vichitvanichphong, S. , Talaei-Khoei, A. , Kerr, D. , Ghapanchi, A.H. , 2014. Adoption 
of assistive technologies for aged care: arealist review of recent studies. In: 
System Sciences (HICSS), 2014 47th Hawaii International Conference on. IEEE, 
pp. 2706每2715 . 
Villamizar, M. , Garrell, A. , Sanfeliu, A. , Moreno-Noguer, F. , 2016. Interactive multiple 
object learning with scanty human supervision. Comput. Vision Image Under- 
stand. 149, 51每64 . 
Vuong, N.K. , Chan, S. , Lau, C.T. , 2015. mhealth sensors, techniques, and applications 
for managing wandering behavior of people with dementia: a review. In: Mobile 
Health. Springer, pp. 11每42 . 
Wang, J. , Liu, Z. , Wu, Y. , Yuan, J. , 2014. Learning actionlet ensemble for 3d human 
action recognition. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. IEEE Trans. 36 (5), 914每927 . 
Wang, J., Xiong, R., Chu, J., 2015. Facial feature points detecting based on gaussian 
mixture models. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 53, 62每68. doi: 10.1016/j.patrec.2014.11. 
004 . 
Wang, P. , Ma, S. , Shen, Y. , 2014. Performance study of feature descriptors for human 
detection on depth map. Int. J. Model. Simul. Sci. Comput. 5 (03) . 
Wang, P. , Sun, L. , Yang, S. , Smeaton, A.F. , Gurrin, C. , 2016. Characterizing everyday 
activities from visual lifelogs based on enhancing concept representation. Com- 
put. Vision Image Understand. 148, 181每192 . 

Wei, X. , Phung, S.L. , Bouzerdoum, A. , 2014. Object segmentation and classication 
using 3-d range camera. J. Visual Commun. Image Represent. 25 (1), 74每85 . 
Wilkowska, W. , Gaul, S. , Ziee, M. , 2010. A Small but Signicant Difference每The Role 
of Gender on Acceptance of Medical Assistive Technologies. Springer . 
Wu, Y. , Ma, B. , Jia, Y. , 2015. Differential tracking with a kernel-based region covari- 
ance descriptor. Pattern Anal. Appl. 18 (1), 45每59 . 
Yan, W. , Weber, C. , Wermter, S. , 2011. A hybrid probabilistic neural model for person 
tracking based on a ceiling-mounted camera. J. Ambient Intell. Smart Environ. 3 
(3), 237每252 . 
Yu, L. , Ong, S.K. , Nee, A.Y.C. , 2016. A tracking solution for mobile augmented reality 
based on sensor-aided marker-less tracking and panoramic mapping. Multime- 
dia Tools Appl. 75 (6), 3199每3220 . 
Yun, Y. , Gu, I.Y.-H. , 2016. Human fall detection in videos via boosting and fusing sta- 
tistical features of appearance, shape and motion dynamics on riemannian man- 
ifolds with applications to assisted living. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 
148, 111每122 . 
Zabala, J., 1995. The sett framework: critical areas to consider when making in- 
formed assistive technology decisions. 
Zagoruyko, S., Lerer, A., Lin, T.-Y., Pinheiro, P. O., Gross, S., Chintala, S., Doll芍r, P., 
2016. A multipath network for object detection. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.02135 . 
Zeng, J. , Sun, Y. , Wang, F. , 2012. A natural hand gesture system for intelligent 
human-computer interaction and medical assistance. In: Intelligent Systems 
(GCIS), 2012 Third Global Congress on, pp. 382每385 . 
Zhai, M., Roshtkhari, M. J., Mori, G., 2016. Deep learning of appearance models for 
online object tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:1607.02568 . 
Zhang, H. , Beveridge, J.R. , Draper, B.A. , Phillips, P.J. , 2015. On the effectiveness of 
soft biometrics for increasing face verication rates. Comput. Vision Image Un- 
derstand. 137, 50每62 . 
Zhang, J. , Shan, Y. , Huang, K. , 2015. ISEE smart home (ISH): Smart video analysis for 
home security. Neurocomputing 149, 752每766 . 
Zhang, W. , Smith, M.L. , Smith, L.N. , Farooq, A. , 2016. Gender and gaze gesture recog- 
nition for human-computer interaction. Comput. Vision Image Understand. 149, 
32每50 . 
Ziee, M. , Klack, L. , Wilkowska, W. , Holzinger, A. , 2013. Acceptance of telemedical 
treatments每a medical professional point of view. In: Human Interface and the 
Management of Information. Information and Interaction for Health, Safety, Mo- 
bility and Complex Environments. Springer, pp. 325每334 . 

