Fusion of electronic nose, electronic tongue and computer vision for animal source food authentication and quality assessment e A review

Ambra Rita Di Rosa a, *, Francesco Leone a, Federica Cheli b, Vincenzo Chiofalo a

a Department of Veterinary Science, Universita degli Studi di Messina, 98168, Italy
b Department of Health, Animal Science and Food Safety, Universita degli Studi di Milano, 20134, Italy

article

info

Article history:
Received 27 January 2017
Received in revised form
6 April 2017
Accepted 21 April 2017
Available online 21 April 2017

Keywords:
Electronic nose
Electronic tongue
Computer vision systems
Chemometrics
Multi-sensor data fusion
Animal source food



abstract

Electronic nose, electronic tongue and computer vision systems, designed to articially perceive avour
and appearance, have been increasingly used in the food industry as rapid and reliable tools for quality
assessment. The use of multivariate analysis methods, together with electronic senses, has shown to be
very powerful; however, due to the high complexity of food, the employment of just single sensor data is
often insufcient. In recent years, much research has been performed to develop several data fusion
strategies, combining the outputs of multiple instrumental sources, for improving the quality assessment
and authentication of food. The aim of this work is to review the recent achievements in the eld of
articial sensors¡¯ application, in the evaluation of animal source food products.
 2017 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, all food products need to be monitored, in order to
ensure an acceptable level of quality and safety. To achieve this
objective, several analysis steps must be implemented across the
entire food supply chain; beginning from the raw ingredients and
extending to the nal product (Nielsen, 2010). Consumers prefer
safe, nutritious and high-quality food products, and are willing to
pay more than the normal price, as long as they receive guarantees
about the food they purchased (Kealesitse and Kabama, 2012).
Therefore, to compete effectively in the marketplace, food com-
panies must produce foods that meet these consumers¡¯ expecta-
tions. In addition, to market safe and high-quality foods, attention
must be paid to the government regulations and to the policies and
standards of international organizations (Nielsen, 2010). Generally,
food quality is specied in terms of traceable origin, known
chemical composition, adequate physical properties, satisfactory
sensory evaluation, safety and health safeguards with respect to
microbiological and toxic contamination, and is inuenced by the
processing and storage. Once food authentication has been granted,
the main basic technique for quality assessment from the consumer
point of view is sensory analysis (Borras et al., 2015), which is based
on the examination of a product through the evaluation of the at-
tributes perceptible by the ve sense organs (Piana et al., 2004).
This method allows to establish the organoleptic prole of diverse
products, however, suffers from several disadvantages. Sensory
analysis is considered time consuming and expensive (Kiani et al.,
2016), subjective (depending upon the professional acumen of
the personnel involved), inconsistent and unpredictable, due to
various human factors (Banerjee et al., 2016), and requires a panel
of skilled assessors. On the other hand, conventional standard
methods for gas or liquid-phase detection and analysis usually rely
on the utilization of precision laboratory instruments like gas
chromatographyemass spectrometry (GC-MS). These methods,
providing an accurate approach for the analysis of type and con-
centration of the single component in a mixture of substances, may
be considered a useful sensorial tool for food avour analysis.
However, they are laborious and time-consuming, require consid-
erable analytical skills, involve a lot of tedious and complex pre-
treatment of samples, and use many hazardous organic reagents
that require high costs for storage and disposal (Huang et al., 2015).
In recent years, much research has been performed to substitute
the perception of human senses with ¡°articial sensors¡±,
in-
struments providing signals related to the sensory attributes
(Borras et al., 2015). In this regard, advances in sensor technology,
electronics, biochemistry and articial
intelligence led to the
development of instruments such as electronic nose (E-Nose),
electronic tongue (E-Tongue) and computer vision systems (CVSs),
capable of measuring and characterizing aroma, taste and colour of
various
products
(Wilson and
Baietto,
2009; Ghasemi-
Varnamkhasti et al., 2011; Cubero et al., 2011). Despite commer-
cial systems are still expensive, their cost can be amortized in terms
of reduced time and cost of analysis. Several advantages are offered
by the applying of electronic senses, over the aforementioned
techniques, and a complete view is given in Table 1.
As the ideal method for in-line process control should enable
direct, rapid, precise, and accurate determination of several target
compounds, with minimal or no sample preparation and reagent
consumption, chemical multisensor systems are one of the most
promising approaches in this eld (Fig. 1). The real time monitoring
of production processes is an actual food industry need; however,
the analysis are performed off-line by wet chemical assays, often
involving enzymatic reactions or separation techniques (Peris and
Escuder-Gilabert, 2013).
In this regard, several papers were
recently published in the literature (Peris and Escuder-Gilabert,
2013; Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti and Aghbashlo, 2014; Wei et al.,
2017; Hosseinpour et al., 2013). A novel method combining the

Fig. 1. Suitability of E-Nose, E-Tongue and CVS for in-line monitoring, modied from
Gunasekaran (1996).

articial senses, called ¡°sensor fusion¡±, is increasingly used in food
quality assessment. Fusion of data coming from complementary
sensors has been applied to a wide range of food and beverages, to
authenticate origin and assess quality, enhancing signicantly the
performance of the same instruments when used individually. The
aim of this work is to review the achievements in the eld of
articial sensor (nose, tongue and eye) application in the evaluation
of animal source food products considering the most relevant
contributions in this eld over the past ve years. After a brief
comment of the principles behind the design of electronic sensors,
the review will focus on the description of data analysis and fusion
methods.

2. E-Nose

In the food¡¯ industry, monitoring of products, in terms of quality
and control of production processes, are performed via physico-
chemical measurements, despite the extreme importance of aroma
as an indicator of quality and product conformity. This was mainly
due to the lack of reliable odour assessing instruments (Ampuero
and Bosset, 2003). The electronic nose is a technology designed
to mimic the olfactory system of humans (Song et al., 2013).
Gardner and Bartlett (1994) dened an electronic nose as an in-
strument that comprises an array of electronic chemical sensors
with partial specicity and an appropriate pattern-recognition
system that is capable of recognizing simple or complex odours
(Fig. 2). Before the advent of solid-state gas sensors arrays, the term
¡°electronic nose¡± was related to the techniques used in the iden-
tication and quantication of volatile compounds, in the head-
space of a product, such as gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS), gas chromatography-ame ionization detector (GC-FID)
and solid-phase micro extraction-mass spectrometry (SPME-MS),
coupled with multivariate statistical analysis (Marsili, 1999). Today,
the electronic noses are instruments, based on the interaction of

Table 1
Comparison between electronic senses, sensory analysis and conventional laboratory instruments features.

Feature

E-Nose

E-Tongue

Computer Vision

Sensory analysis

Conventional laboratory instruments

Rapidness
Low-cost analysis
Use of chemicals
Objectiveness
Non-destructive measurements
Sample pre-treatment
Simplicity
Single operator
Permanent storage of data

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes

Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
Yes

No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes

64

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

noses. Next to the instrumental evolution, there was an improve-
ment of the signal processing techniques. An example is the
building of accurate predictive models, based on PLS, MLR, SVM and
ANN, for the determination of quality parameters (Huang et al.,
2015) or adulterants detection and quantication (Tian et al.,
2013). Although the E-Nose technology offers various advantages
over traditional analysis, such as the reduction in time and cost of
analysis, and its environmentally friendly nature (Smyth and
Cozzolino, 2013); the sensors still present a number of weak
points. These includes the noise by major compounds, which may
not be relevant to aroma (Rodriguez-Mendez et al., 2004); the
sensor drift or poisoning (Lout et al., 2015), and the responses
obtained by each sensor, which provide highly ambiguous quali-
tative or quantitative information, resulting in a sort of ¡°nger-
print¡± of the sample (Ampuero and Bosset, 2003).
Recent trends to overcome sensor shortcomings include:
 The integration of electronic nose analysis with gas chroma-
tography: Cheng et al. (2013), for example, employed an elec-
tronic nose to distinguish different propolis samples, according
to their geographical origin. Moreover, via DHS-GC/MS, they
were able to identify the volatile compounds most correlated
with the discrimination;
 The development of hybrid electronic noses, based on the
combination of different sensor technologies: the most common
utilization of hybrid systems involve MOS and MOSFET, how-
ever, commercial system are available that use MOS, MOSFET
and BAW in various combinations. The major advantage of this
type of electronic nose is that it incorporates the advantages
inherent to the different transducer technologies, at the same
time giving a choice for which chemical sensors can be used
(Kiani et al., 2016).

Another aspect is the humidity of the headspace above a food
sample. With sensors that are reactive to the presence of water, this
may be an interfering factor, as the water vapour concentration in
the headspace is normally orders of magnitude higher than the
concentration of the aroma compounds, whose presence one
wishes to detect (Visser and Taylor, 1998). To deal with this inter-
ference, two methodologies are commonly used. One is sample
pre-treatment to obtain xed experimental conditions, and the
other is a parametric compensation by additional measuring of the
variable parameters and calibration under, e.g., different humidity
conditions (Rock et al., 2008). An universal E-Nose, able to cope
with every odour type, is non realistic. Therefore, data processing
and instrumentation must be specically designed for each
application.

Fig. 2. Components of E-Nose.

semi-selective sensors with volatile compounds. Several types of
sensors are employed in the electronic nose architectures, and the
most popular are reported in Table 2.
A specic description of sensor characteristics and properties is
outside the scope of this review. Interested readers are referred to
the following reviews for details on this topic (Albert et al., 2000;
Schaller et al., 1998; Nagle et al., 2002; Ampuero and Bosset,
2003; James et al., 2005). The concept of an articial nose system
was proposed by Persaud and Dodd (1982). At the beginning of the
1990s the rst applications of the electronic nose for food analysis
appeared (Winquist et al., 1993; Olafsson et al., 1992). Later on, E-
Noses have been used in various research elds; however, the most
attention has been paid to the food industry. At research and food
industry levels, the E-Nose technology have been employed for
quality control of raw and manufactured products: process, fresh-
ness and maturity monitoring, shelf-life investigations, authen-
ticity assessments of premium products and microbial pathogen
detection. These research topics and food industry requirements in
term of food analysis have been identied by Schaller et al. (1998).
Since then, a huge literature regarding this topic can be found
(Lout et al., 2015). The most recent applications, last 5 years, of
electronic noses in food assessment are listed in Table 3.
These results indicate that the most recent E-Nose applications,
in food industry, remained unchanged over time. Many differences
are found, instead, in the data collection and elaboration processes.
The technologic advance led to the wide diffusion of commercial
electronic noses, automated and with a greater number of sensors,
further, the devices miniaturization brought to portable electronic

Table 2
E-Nose: most popular sensors.

Sensors

MOS (Metal-oxide
semiconductor)

CP (Conducting polymer)

Piezoelectric crystal sensors,
including BAW (Bulk
acoustic wave) and SAW
(Surface acoustic wave)

Description

metal-oxide semiconducting lm (SnO2, TiO2, ZnO, ZrO2), coated onto a
substrate. Oxygen from the air is dissolved in the sensor lattice setting its
electrical resistance to a background level. During the measurement, the volatile
molecules are adsorbed at the surface of the semiconductor, where they react
with the oxygen species, causing a modication of the sensor resistance.
conducting organic polymer sensors, made of semiconducting materials,
aromatic or heteroaromatic, such as polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene,
polyindole, deposited onto a substrate and between two gold-plated electrodes,
whose electrical conductivity is altered in response to organic vapours.
consist of a piezoelectric quartz, LiNbO3, or LiTaO3 crystal, coated with a
membrane, which, depending on its afnity, selectively adsorbs the volatile
molecules present. Adsorption of volatile compounds onto the sensing
membrane increases the mass of the device resulting in a change in its
resonance frequency

References

Ampuero and Bosset, 2003

Ampuero and Bosset, 2003; James et al., 2005

Ampuero and Bosset, 2003

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

65

Table 3
Application of electronic noses, in the last 5 years, on food assessment.

Category

Application

Electronic nose model

Number of sensors and technology

Reference

Pork

Cheese

Egg

Fish

Mutton
Butter
Ham

Yogurt
Honey

Poultry

Beef

Rapid identication for halal authentication
Predicting shelf-life
Effects of kimchi and smoking on quality characteristics and
shelf-life of cooked sausages
Measuring total volatile basic nitrogen and total viable counts
during refrigerated storage
Classication of Pecorino
Consumer acceptability of ovine cheese from ewes fed extruded
linseed-enriched diets
Physicochemical and textural properties of reduced fat Cheddar
Discrimination of cow feeding with olive by-product from
cheese
Detect the authenticity of Parmigiano-Reggiano
Prediction of TVB-N in eggs
Discriminating eggs from different poultry species
Species discrimination among three kinds of puffer sh
Detection of off-avours in catsh
A model for discrimination freshness of shrimp
Analysis of pork adulteration in minced mutton
Development of a method for butter type differentiation
Characterization and differentiation of Italian Parma, San
Daniele and Toscano dry-cured hams
Flavour analysis of stirred yoghurt with cheddar cheese adding
Botanical origin identication and quality determination of
honey
Contribution of chicken base addition to aroma characteristics
of Maillard reaction products
Rapid measuring and modelling avour quality changes of
oxidized chicken fat
Quality assessment of beef llets
Rapid detection of meat spoilage

zNose
FOX 4000
7100 zNose

PEN3

EOS 507
EOS 835

zNose
FOX 4000

EOS 835
PEN3
FOX 4000
FOX 4000
AromaScan A32S
Figaro Engineering
PEN2
PEN2
PEN2

FOX 4000
FOX 4000

FOX 4000

FOX 4000

LibraNose
LibraNose

1 SAW
18 MOS
1 SAW

10 MOS

6 MOS
6 MOS

1 SAW
18 MOS

6 MOS
10 MOS
18 MOS
18 MOS
15 CP
6 MOS
10 MOS
10 MOS
10 MOS

18 MOS
18 MOS

18 MOS

18 MOS

8 BAW
8 BAW

Nurjuliana et al., 2011
Tang et al., 2013
Kim et al., 2014

Li et al., 2016

Cevoli et al., 2011
Branciari et al., 2012

Nateghi et al., 2012
Di Rosa et al., 2015

Sberveglieri et al., 2015
Liu and Tu, 2012
Wang et al., 2014
Zhang et al., 2012
Wilson et al., 2013
Du et al., 2015
Tian et al., 2013
Lorenzen et al., 2013
Laureati et al., 2014

Li et al., 2014
Huang et al., 2015

Xiao et al., 2015

Song et al., 2013

Mohareb et al., 2016
Kodogiannis, 2016

3. E-Tongue

Hayashi et al. (1990) proposed the rst electronic tongue
concept, called ¡°taste sensor¡±, which consisted of a multichannel
electrode with transducers composed of lipid membranes immo-
bilized with a polymer, for the intension of mimicking the functions
of human gustatory receptors. The taste we perceive is composed of
ve kinds of taste qualities: sourness, saltiness, sweetness, bitter-
ness and umami. Additional quality are pungency and astringency,
which are related to the sense of pain (Tahara et al., 2013) (Table 4).
The objective of the electronic tongue technology is to study the
chemical substances showing the ve basic taste qualities. After-
ward, other tastes like astringent and pungent substances were
investigated (Zou et al., 2015).
The electronic tongue can be described as an analytical tool,
including an array of non-specic, poorly selective chemical sen-
sors, with partial specicity (cross-selectivity), coupled with che-
mometric processing,
for
recognizing the qualitative and
quantitative composition of multispecies solutions (Fig. 3) (Ha
et al., 2015). A variety of chemical sensors can be employed in the

Fig. 3. Components of E-Tongue.

Table 4
Chemical substances showing the ve basic taste qualities, pungency and astrin-
gency, as reported by Toko et al., 2016.

Taste

Sweetness
Saltiness
Sourness

Bitterness
Umami

Astringency
Pungency

Main materials

Sucrose, glucose, articial sweetener
Cations, represented by sodium ions
Dissociated hydrogen ions from acetic acid,
hydrochloric acid, citric acid, etc.
Caffeine, theobromine, quinine, humulone
Monosodium glutamate (MSG), disodium inosinate
(IMP), disodium guanylate (GMP)
Tannin-based compounds
Capsaicin, allyl isothiocyanate, piperine

design of electronic tongues: electrochemical
(voltammetric,
potentiometric, amperometric,
impedimetric, conductimetric),
optical or enzymatic sensors (biosensors). However, most of these
systems are based on potentiometric sensors
(Ciosek and
Wroblewski, 2011). In potentiometry, a potential is measured be-
tween two electrodes under the conditions of no current ow. The
measured potential may then be used to determine the analytical
quantity of interest, generally the concentration of some compo-
nent of the solution (Zou et al., 2015). Ion-selective electrodes (ISEs)
represent the largest group among potentiometric sensors (Ciosek
and Wroblewski, 2011). The potential of the ion-selective elec-
trodes is a function of the activity of ionic species in a sample

66

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

solution and is formed in the ion-sensitive membrane, where se-
lective complexation (ion recognition) of the analyte molecules
occurs (Ciosek and Wroblewski, 2007). Potentiometric ion and
chemical sensors based on eld-effect devices form another group
of transducers that can be easily miniaturized and are fabricated by
means of microelectronic technology. Among them, most studies
are ion-sensitive eld-effect transistors (ISFETs), with different ion-
selective membranes (often also called chemically sensitive eld-
effect transistors or Chem-FETs) (Zou et al., 2015). Voltammetric
sensors have been extensively used in E-Tongue systems, as well.
Voltammetry is a very powerful analytical technique, due to fea-
tures such as its very high sensitivity, versatility, simplicity and
robustness. Normally, redox-active compounds are oxidized or
reduced at the working electrode, giving rise to a current, which is
measured at a xed potential. When a complex media, consisting of
several redox-active species and various ions, is analysed, the
selectivity of the system is often insufcient for specic analysis of
single components. Thus, rather complicated voltammograms are
obtained and the interpretation of data usually rely on multivariate
analysis methods. The rst prototype of a voltammetric E-Tongue
was proposed by Winquist et al. (1997), which were able to classify
various fruit drinks and milk, and also follow some aging processes.
Later, an E-Tongue based on chemically modied voltammetric
electrodes was successfully employed for the evaluation of poly-
phenolic content in extra virgin oils (Rodriguez-Mendez et al.,
2008). Finally, the group of del Valle developed an E-Tongue sys-
tem, based on voltammetric sensors with different modiers
(metallic nano-sized particles and conducting polymers), capable
of distinguishing between different kinds of Cava wines (Ceto et al.,
2010). However, we suggest the reading of the following reviews
for detailed information about E-Tongue sensor technologies (Ha
et al., 2015; Zou et al., 2015; Ciosek and Wroblewski, 2007). Over
the past years, the E-Tongues have emerged as rapid and easy-to-
use tools, very promising for evaluation of food quality, especially
in such situations in which only qualitative or semi-quantitative
information is required (Escuder-Gilabert and Peris, 2010). A
search of the recent, relevant literature shows that the major cat-
egories of use for electronic tongues are freshness evaluation and
shelf life investigation; process monitoring; quality control studies;
authenticity assessment and foodstuff
recognition (Escuder-
Gilabert and Peris, 2010). Some examples of the most recent elec-
tronic tongue applications are reported in Table 5.
The E-Tongue employment is easy for liquid food products
(milk, eggs, yogurt and honey), whose preparation is limited to
dilution and/or ltration, but laborious for solids. Different authors
reported the procedure for ham (Dang et al., 2015) and beef (Zhang
et al., 2015; Apetrei and Apetrei, 2016) test sample solutions
preparation. The process involves the sample homogenization with
a solvent, a centrifugation, the aqueous supernatant separation and
its ltration. However, other authors (Gil et al., 2011; Ruiz-Rico
et al., 2013), using laboratory-made electronic tongues, based on
metallic electrodes, reported an alternative method, which consist
in introducing the sensors directly in the crude samples. The main
disadvantages of E-Tongue sensors are that they are easily affected
by environmental conditions i.e. temperature and humidity, which
may cause sensor drift (Wadehra and Patil, 2016), and the
adsorption of solution components that inuence the membrane
potential (Escuder-Gilabert and Peris, 2010). These factors can be
minimized by controlling the room temperature and washing the
electrodes, alternating a cleaning beaker (containing water) to the
samples solutions during the analysis. Even with technological
advances and promising results, these sensors still cannot mimic
the biological features of human tongue, concerning identifying
elusive analytes in complicated mixtures.
In this case, bio-
electronics tongues, equipped with enzymatic and gustatory

receptor-based biosensors array, can provide taste signals triggered
by the binding activities between selective taste receptors and
tastants, making it possible to develop articial taste sensors that
more closely mimic human taste system (Ha et al., 2015).

4. CVS

Computer vision is the science that develops theoretical and
algorithmic basis to automatically extract and analyse useful in-
formation about physical objects from images (Wu and Sun, 2013).
Timmermans (1998) states that it encloses the capturing, process-
ing and analysis of two-dimensional images, with others noting
that it aims to duplicate the effect of human vision by electronically
perceiving and understanding an image (Sonka et al., 1993). In
general, the hardware conguration of a computer vision system
consists of an illumination device, a camera, a personal computer
and a high-resolution monitor (Wu and Sun, 2013) (Fig. 4). As in the
case of the human eye, the operation of CVS depends on the in-
tensity of lighting. Properly designed lighting can improve the
precision of analysis and decrease analysis time. Fluorescent and
incandescent bulbs are the most frequently used light sources.
Luminescent electric diodes (LEDs), quartz halogen lamps, metal
halide lamps and high-pressure sodium lamps are also used
(Sliwinska et al., 2014). Moreover, a camera converting photons to
electrical signals is used (Wu and Sun, 2013). There are two types of
cameras, that is, analog and digital cameras, which are equipped
with CCD (Charged-coupled device) or CMOS (Complementary
metal-oxide semiconductor) sensor arrays. In an analog camera, the
recorded image is transformed into the analog signal and then
transferred to a frame grabber, which transforms the analog signal
into a digital data stream and sends it to the computer memory. In
digital cameras, a frame grabber is not needed because the analog
signal is sent directly to the computer via a USB or FireWire adapter
(Sliwinska et al., 2014). Interested readers are referred to the
following reviews for a specic description of computer vision
systems components (Wu and Sun, 2013; Sliwinska et al., 2014).
The image processing and the image analysis represent the core of
computer vision (Krutz et al., 2000). Image processing involves a
series of operation that enhance the quality of an image in order to
remove defects. Image analysis is the process of distinguishing the
objects from the background and producing quantitative informa-
tion (Brosnan and Sun, 2004). As a non-destructive detecting
approach, CVS have been used increasingly in the food industry for
inspection and evaluation purposes as they provide suitably rapid,
economic, consistent and objective assessment (Sun, 2000). Pre-
cisely, CVSs are feasible to classify food products into specic
grades, detect defects and estimate properties such as colour,
shape, size, surface defects, and contamination (Ma et al., 2016).
Some examples are listed in Table 6.
Results show how CVS applications are targeted at those food
products for which the appearance is the main key quality attribute
evaluated by the consumers. In freshness assessment of seafood
products, sensory evaluation is a prevalent procedure and gives
valuable information about the quality and consumer acceptance.
This method is based on signicant appearance parameters such as,
skin, slime, eyes, gills and belly (Dowlati et al., 2013). Further,
consumers associate freshness of red meat with a homogeneous,
bright cherry-red colour and consider dark red, purple or brown
meat as unacceptable (Sun et al., 2011). Traditionally, quality in-
spection of agricultural and food products has been performed by
human graders. However, in most cases these manual inspections
are time-consuming and laborious. Moreover, the accuracy of the
tests cannot be guaranteed (Park et al., 1996). The applying of
computer vision techniques could offer several advantages,
including:

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

67

Table 5
Electronic tongues applications, in the last 5 years, on animal source food assessment.

Category

Object of investigation

Milk

Pork
Poultry
Honey

Ham

Yogurt
Beef

Fish

Detection of antibiotic residues
Discrimination of urea and melamine adulterated skimmed milk powder
Monitoring of quality and storage time
Brands classication
Qualitative analysis of milk adulterated with urea
Monitoring of physicalechemical and microbiological changes under cold storage
Changes of avour compounds of hydrolysed chicken bones during Maillard reaction
Discrimination according to the botanical origin
Tracing oral and geographical origins
Articial neural networks analysis of the data obtained with an electronic tongue,
applied to ham-curing process with different salt formulations
Comparison of umami taste peptides in water-soluble extractions
Evaluation of varieties
Flavour assessment, recognition and chemical compositions according to its correlation
with avour
Detection of ammonia and putrescine
Freshness monitoring
Quality assessment

Principle of detection

Reference

Voltammetry
Wei and Wang, 2011
Voltammetry
Hilding-Ohlsson et al., 2012
Voltammetry
Wei et al., 2013a
Voltammetry
Yu et al., 2015
Voltammetry
Li et al., 2015
Potentiometry
Gil et al., 2011
Potentiometry
Sun et al., 2014
Potentiometry
Escriche et al., 2012
Potentiometry and Voltammetry Wei and Wang, 2014
Potentiometry
Gil-Sanchez et al., 2015

Voltammetry
Voltammetry
Potentiometry

Voltammetry
Voltammetry
Voltammetry

Dang et al., 2015
Wei et al., 2013b
Zhang et al., 2015

Apetrei and Apetrei, 2016
Apetrei et al., 2013
Ruiz-Rico et al., 2013

 The rapidness, preciseness, objectiveness, efciency and non-
destruction of the measurement with low cost and no sample
pre-treatment (Wu and Sun, 2013);

Fig. 4. Components of CVS.

Fig. 5. a) Low-level fusion process, b) Mid-level fusion process, c) High-level fusion
process.

 The permanent storage of data, allowing further analysis later
 Image capturing and illumination devices are easy to mount,
(Tarbell and Reid, 1991);
remove, replace, and upgrade;
 The possibility of automation for in-line monitoring and con-
trolling of industrial scale food operations (Hosseinpour et al.,
2013).

However, extra chemical composition information cannot be
extracted by using CVSs. With the help of spectrometry, chemical
composition information can be obtained successfully (Ma et al.,
2016). With hyperspectral
imaging technique, several authors
achieved excellent results in a variety of applications; few examples
are reported in Table 7.
Further, the employment of 3-dimensionals cameras may help
to improve analysis, provide more information and allow the
study of complex or irregular-shape materials with fewer errors
and less time (Ma et al., 2016). Mortensen et al. (2016), for
example, recently reported the development of a fully auto-
mated, 3D camera-based weighing system for broiler chickens. In
addition, these devices may nd application in texture analysis,
so far based on 2D image sequences, where the texture distri-
bution is limited to a single plane. The use of three-dimensional
images could help to avoid the loss of information when texture
features are studied from different orientations (Avila et al.,
2015).

5. Statistical approach

A measurement performed by means of electronic senses
generates a vast volume of data; therefore, it is necessary to
apply methods of data analysis, which allow for data classica-
tion (Sliwinska et al., 2014). The use of multivariate analysis
methods, together with sensor arrays, has shown to be very
powerful. Two main issues are dealt with, to search for a struc-
ture and correlation in the data, or to make a model from a
training set of data, which is then used to make predictions from
test data (Zou et al., 2015). So far, many pattern analysis tech-
niques for data analysis of sensor array measurements were
presented (Ciosek and Wroblewski, 2007). The most popular are
listed in Table 8:
These techniques are routinely used in conjunction with elec-
tronic senses. Some examples are listed below (Table 9).

68

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

Table 6
Computer vision application, in the last 5 years, on animal source food.

Category Object of investigation

Device

Quality attribute measured

References

Poultry
Pork

Beef

Egg

Fish

Honey

Estimation of fat content
Generic digital camera
Lightness of the colour as a factor for assessing the quality
CMOS
Evaluating the appearance of Lucanian dry sausage
CMOS
Prediction of colour attributes
Generic digital camera
Detection of PSE
CMOS
Defect detection
CMOS
Tracking meat cuts in slaughterhouses
Microsoft Kinect camera
Predicting colour grade
Generic digital camera
Measurement of colour
CMOS
Identication of micro-crack
CCD
Expert grading system
CCD
Volume prediction
CCD
External and internal defect detection
Generic digital camera
Quantication of gaping, bruising, and blood spots in salmon llets Generic digital camera
Species classication
Smartphone
Estimation of sushi shrimp weight
CCD
An efcient shape analysis method for shrimp
CCD
Freshness assessment
CCD
Online monitoring of shrimp colour changes during drying
CCD
Classication of boiled shrimp¡¯s shape
Generic digital camera
Characterization
CCD

Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Colour
Defects
Size and defects
Size
Defects
Defects and colour
Colour
Size
Size
Colour
Colour
Shape
Colour

Chmiel et al., 2011a
Chmiel et al., 2011b
Girolami et al., 2014
Sun et al., 2016
Chmiel et al., 2016
Chmiel and Slowinski, 2016
Larsen et al., 2014
Sun et al., 2011
Girolami et al., 2013
Li et al., 2012
Omid et al., 2013
Soltani et al., 2014
Arivazhagan et al., 2013
Balaban et al., 2011
Hu et al., 2012
Poonnoy and Chum-in, 2012
Lee et al., 2012a
Dowlati et al., 2013
Hosseinpour et al., 2013
Poonnoy et al., 2014
Shaee et al., 2014

Table 7
Recently reported hyperspectral image applications.

Object of investigation

Image processing

Optimal wavelength selection Multivariable data analysis

References

Rapid evaluation of thiobarbituric acid
(TBA) value in grass carp llet

Non-destructive prediction of
thiobarbituric acid reactive
substances (TBARS) value for
freshness evaluation of chicken meat
Model improvement for predicting
moisture content in pork longissimus
dorsi muscles under diverse
processing conditions
Rapid prediction of hydroxyproline
content in chicken meat
Quantitative determination of total
pigments in red meats

6. Sensor fusion

Calibration, identication of ROI
(Region of interest), spectra extraction,
MSC (Multiplicative scatter correction)
Calibration, identication of ROI,
spectra extraction, MSC

RC (Regression coefcients)

PLSR, MLR
(Multiple linear regression)

Cheng et al., 2015

SPA (Successive
projection algorithm)

PLSR

Xiong et al., 2015a

Calibration, identication of ROI,
spectra extraction, GLGCM (Grey-level-
gradient co-occurrence matrix)

Calibration, identication of ROI,
spectra extraction
Calibration, identication of ROI,
spectra extraction

RC

RC

RC, SPA

PCA, PLSR

Ma et al., 2017

PLSR

PLSR

Xiong et al., 2015b

Xiong et al., 2015c

Due to the high complexity of food, the employment of just
single sensor data, E-nose or E-tongue or E-eye, is insufcient, and
multi-sensor data fusion techniques, combining the outputs of
multiple instrumental
sources,
represent
the challenge for
improving the quality assessment and authentication of food
(Borras et al., 2015). Fusion of data from complementary sensors,
responding to different signature phenomena, may increase the
probability of correct classication; therefore, characteristics that
are not classied by one sensor may be apparent or measured by
another (Banerjee et al., 2016). However, this is not always true in
practical experience, because not all features are important for
understanding or representing the underlying phenomenon of in-
terest (Liu et al., 2009). In general, multi-sensor data fusion is the
technique related to problem of how to combine data from one or
multiple (and possibly diverse) sensors, in order to make inferences
about a physical event, activity or situation (Masnan et al., 2012).
Mitchell (2007) dened multi-sensor data fusion as the theory,
techniques, and tools, which are used for combining sensor data, or
data derived from sensory data into a common representational
format (Masnan et al., 2012). Fusion processes are often categorized
in a three-level model, distinguishing low, intermediate, and high
level fusion (Elmenreich, 2002). It is important to note that all three

levels use feature extraction, transforming the raw signal provided
by the sensor into a reduced vector of features describing parsi-
moniously the original information, and identity declaration that
assigns a quality class to the measured produce based on the
feature extraction process (Zou et al., 2015). The different data
fusion approaches are described in Table 10.
In summary, low-level fusion is conceptually simple (Borras
et al., 2015) and it is believed the most accurate technique (Hall
and Llinas, 1997), due to the fact that the originality information
from each sensor is maintained and used in further processes
(Masnan et al., 2012). Some limitations are a high volume data and
the possible predominance of one data source over the others. This
is partially overcome by mid-level fusion, where feature extraction
signicantly reduces the data dimensionality (Borras et al., 2015). In
addition, low-level fusion necessitates consubstantial sensors and
extensive data manipulation, takes a lot of time, and could not be
used for real-time data processing (Kiani et al., 2016). Feature level
fusion is very useful for non-commensurate type data, i.e., if sensors
are looking for different physical parameters (Banerjee et al., 2016).
Here, the challenge is to nd the optimal combination of extracted
features and pre-processing that describe the signicant variation
of the instrumental responses and provides the best nal model
(Borras et al., 2015). High-level fusion, nally, allows focusing on
each individual techniques, but the nal identity declaration is

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

69

Table 8
Most frequently used statistical analysis coupled with sensor arrays.

Technique

Description

PCA (Principal components
analysis)

ANNs (Articial neural
networks)

LDA (Linear discriminant
analysis)

PLSR (Partial least square
regression)

SVM (Support vector machines)

is a dimension reduction technique that creates a few new variables called principal
components (PCs) from linear combination of the original variables. For highly collinear
data, a few principal components retain the same information as many original variables,
and allow the distribution of samples and variables to be easily plotted and visually
analysed. Because is easy to use, this unsupervised exploratory technique is usually applied
prior to any other more complex classication or prediction.
are computational models, inspired by the way biological nervous systems, which goal is to
solve problems in the same way that the human brain would. ANNs are composed of a large
number of densely interconnected adaptive simple processing elements (called articial
neurons or nodes), distributed in different layers. The rst layer is called ¡°input layer¡± and is
responsible for inputting data into the network. The number of neurons in this layer equals
the number of values that are concurrently being fed into the network. The last neuron layer,
a so-called ¡°output layer¡±, is used to generate the output values. Hidden layers, which do not
interact with the external environment, can be present between the input and output layers.
Neurons assigned to specic hidden layers process the input information into the output
information. A vast number of networks, new or modications of existing ones are being
constantly developed. Backpropagation (BP) and radial basis function (RBF) networks are
the most frequently used in data fusion. In the rst type, the term backpropagation refers to
the way the error is propagated backward from the output layer, to the hidden layer, and
nally to the input layer. The second type of networks, unlike the sigmoid transfer function
in BPANNs, employ a radial basis function (such as a Gaussian kernel). In general, ANNs are
more robust and often outperform other computational tools in solving a variety of
problems ranging from modelling, classication, pattern recognition and multivariate data
analysis.
is most commonly used as dimensionality reduction technique in the pre-processing step
for pattern classication and machine learning applications. The goal is to project a dataset
onto a lower-dimensional space with good class-separability in order avoid overtting and
reduce computational costs. The general LDA approach is very similar to a PCA, but in
addition to nding the component axes that maximize the variance of our data, we are
additionally interested in the axes that maximize the separation between multiple classes.
Both LDA and PCA are linear transformation techniques that are commonly used for
dimensionality reduction. PCA can be described as an ¡°unsupervised¡± algorithm, since it
¡°ignores¡± class labels and its goal is to nd the directions (the so-called principal
components) that maximize the variance in a dataset. In contrast to PCA, LDA is ¡°supervised¡±
and computes the directions (¡°linear discriminants¡±) that will represent the axes that
maximize the separation between multiple classes. Although it might sound intuitive that
LDA is superior to PCA for a multi-class classication task where the class labels are known,
this might not always the case. In practice, it is also not uncommon to use both LDA and PCA
in combination, e.g., PCA for dimensionality reduction followed by an LDA.
combines features from and generalizes PCA and multiple linear regression. Its goal is to
analyse or predict a set of dependent variables from a set of independent variables or
predictors. This prediction is achieved by extracting from the predictors a set of orthogonal
factors called latent variables, which have the best predictive power. PLSR is particularly
useful when we need to predict a set of dependent variables from a (very) large set of
independent variables (i.e., predictors). This approach originated in the social sciences, but
became popular rst in chemometrics and then in sensory evaluation.
is a supervised machine learning algorithm that can be used for either classication or
regression challenges. However, it is mostly used in classication problems. Similarly to
ANN, the assignment of objects to specic classes by the SVM method is realized with the
use of a training set. The underlying principle of SVM is the creation of an optimal
hyperplane that would separate the data belonging to the opposite classes, with the highest
possible condent margin.

References

Borras et al., 2015

Zou et al., 2015
Basheer and Hajmeer, 2000
Sliwinska et al., 2014
Borras et al., 2015
Haykin, 1994
Goyal and Goyal, 2011
Debska and Guzowska-Swider, 2011

Raschka, 2014
Martinez and Kak, 2001

Abdi, 2010

Sliwinska et al., 2014

obtained from only a few values. One advantage is that every in-
dividual matrix is treated independently, and the results from
inefcient techniques do not worsen the overall performance as
much as in the other fusion levels. However, the classication or
regression models that work best for each block needs to be
determined, to ensure better performances than individual models
(Borras et al., 2015). This requires a knowledge base of the target,
substantial pre-processing and causes considerable information
losses (Kiani et al., 2016). Data fusion has been applied to a wide
range of food and beverages to authenticate origin and assess
quality. Most of the analysis combine gas sensor and liquid sensor
devices and, sometimes, UVeVis spectroscopy or CVSs, considered
as an E-eye. These techniques used all together are called ¡°elec-
tronic panel¡± since they emulate the human panel responses when
sensory analysing the products (Borras et al., 2015). The following
table summarizes the main recently applications of data fusion in

animal source food (Table 11).
Overall results shows clearly an increase in the classication
accuracies, using fusion methods, compared to any of the single
modality data. Zakaria et al. (2011) found the electronic nose and
tongue to be ineffective in the discrimination of different honey
samples. However, by applying data fusion, the classication of
honey with different oral origin, sugar syrups and adulterated
samples was achieved. In this experiment, PCA and LDA were
chosen to perform the low-level fusion, while PNN was used to
verify and validate the fusion of data. Other authors (Subari et al.,
2014) reported the honey concentration estimation mean abso-
lute error result of single modality, based on electronic nose or FT-
IR that was 15.0%; higher compared to fusion result, which gave
6.9%. In this work, 32 resistances of electronic nose and 5 selected
peaks of FT-IR spectra were used to train a MLP-ANN in order to
achieve the estimation task. In addition, multi-sensor data fusion

70

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

Table 9
Multivariate statistical analysis applied to animal source food assessment.

Technique used

Object of investigation

Device

Reference

PCA

ANNs

LDA

PLSR

SVM

Classication of Hairtail sh and pork freshness
Geographical origin identication of propolis
Discriminating eggs from different poultry species
Eggshell crack detection
Classication of Pecorino cheeses
Honey characterization
Classication of boiled shrimp¡¯s shape
Eggs volume prediction
Honey purity estimation
Analysis of ham-curing processes with different salt formulations
Discrimination between products made from Iberian pigs and from other pigs
Discrimination of meat from llama and alpaca
Honey quality assessment
Evaluation of meat quality in relation to storage time
Rapid measuring and modelling avor quality changes of oxidized chicken fat
Predict fresh beef colour grading
Fish species classication
Prediction of total viable counts on chilled pork
Sensory and microbiological quality assessment of beef llets
Quality assessment of beef llets

E-nose
E-nose, GC-MS
E-nose
CVS, Acoustic response
E-nose
CVS
CVS
CVS
E-nose, FT-IR
E-tongue
E-nose
E-nose
E-nose, E-tongue
E-nose
E-nose
CVS
CVS
E-nose
E-nose
E-nose

Tian et al., 2012
Cheng et al., 2013
Wang et al., 2014
Pan et al., 2011
Cevoli et al., 2011
Shaee et al., 2014
Poonnoy et al., 2014
Soltani et al., 2014
Subari et al., 2014
Gil-Sanchez et al., 2015
Gonzalez-Martin et al., 2000
Neely et al., 2001
Masnan et al., 2012
Vestergaard et al., 2007
Song et al., 2013
Sun et al., 2011
Hu et al., 2012
Wang et al., 2012
Papadopoulou et al., 2013
Mohareb et al., 2016

Table 10
Description of the different data fusion methodologies.

Fusion level

Description

Low

Intermediate

High

data from all sources are simply concatenated sample-wise into a single matrix that has many rows as samples and as many
columns as signals measured by the different instruments (Fig. 5a). In order to fuse raw sensor data, the original sensor data
must be commensurate, i.e., must be observations of similar physical quantities. For instance, one acoustic wave sensor data that
measures sound cannot be merged with visual image data.
some relevant features are rst extracted from each data source separately and then concatenated into a single array that is used
for multivariate classication and regression (Fig. 5b). The most common approach is to fuse a number of latent variables
obtained independently from the signals of each instrument. Usually scores from principal component analysis (PCA) or partial-
least square discriminant analysis (PLS-DA) are used.
a separate model is built for each available data set, and then, the model responses are combined to produce a nal ¡°fused¡±
response. The majority vote method is the easiest approach in food classication; each of the available models predicts a class
label for a sample, and the class label that is predicted by the majority of the models is selected. More advanced methods are
available, but they require probabilistic model outputs. The naive Bayes approach, for example, multiplies the class probabilities
assuming independence, and selects the class label with the highest probability. In Fig. 5c, decision level fusion is depicted.

References

Borras et al., 2015
Hall and Llinas, 1997
Banerjee et al., 2016

Borras et al., 2015

Doeswijk et al., 2011
Kuncheva, 2004

has proven to be efcient, as a non-destructive tool, in the detection
of sh freshness (Han et al., 2014). Electronic nose and electronic
tongue data were analysed by principal component analysis (PCA)
and different three-layer basis function neural network (RBF-NN)
were established. Further, performance of RBF-NN models with
different numbers of principal components (PCs) as the input were
compared. Experimental results revealed that the discrimination
rates improved to 94.0% and 93.9% in the training set and prediction
set, respectively, building the RBF-NN with the combination of the

two instrument data. Finally, Santonico et al. (2015) demonstrate
the possibility to analyse mozzarella cheese easily and without
damaging the product, using liquid sensors (electronic tongue) and
an electro-dynamic probe (to determine the mechanical pro-
prieties). The classication was performed using partial-least
squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA). Of the three levels of data
fusion, low and mid-level fusion are the most used. Low-level
fusion is the rst attempt approach, but, when data are very
different in size or scale, the more tuneable mid-level fusion can

Table 11
Data fusion main applications on animal source food, reported in the last ve years.

Category

Application

Input data

Fusion level

References

Fish

Honey

Milk
Egg
Cheese
Pork

Non-destructive detection of freshness during preservation
Fresh/frozen-thawed discrimination
Freshness detection
Classication and detection of adulteration
Enhancing classication performance
Classication of pure and adulterated
Determination of the botanical origin
Taste assessment
Purity estimation
Classify botanical origin and determine adulteration
Aging time and brand classication
Shell crack detection
Mozzarella characterization and authentication
Non-destructive measurement of total volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N)

E-nose, E-tongue
CVS, NIR, texture analyser
CVS, NIR
E-nose, E-tongue, FT-IR, GC-MS
E-nose, E-tongue
E-nose, NIR
E-tongue, UVeViseNIR
E-nose, E-tongue, FT-IR
E-nose, FT-IR
E-nose, E-tongue, NIR, FT-IR
E-nose, E-tongue
CVS, ARS
E-tongue, mechanical sensor
E-nose, CVS, NIR

Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
Low
Low and Intermediate
Intermediate
Intermediate
Low
Intermediate
Intermediate
High
Low
Intermediate

Han et al., 2014
Ottavian et al., 2014
Huang et al., 2016
Zakaria et al., 2011
Masnan et al., 2012
Subari et al., 2012
Ulloa et al., 2013
Maamor et al., 2014
Subari et al., 2014
Gan et al., 2016
Bougrini et al., 2014
Pan et al., 2011
Santonico et al., 2015
Huang et al., 2014

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

71

yield better results (Borras et al., 2015). High-level fusion, instead, is
the least used approach. Several researchers reported various lim-
itations while working with the combined systems. Often, the
sensor devices are used separately, with different experimental
conditions, which may lead to error in the nal decision. Another
difculty is the correlating parameter. The instruments are trained
with respect to sensory panel data or chemical analysis data. Sen-
sory panel data are subjective in nature and results in poor classi-
cation or quality estimation for these systems. In that respect,
chemical analysis data is much more reliable. But, at the same time,
the electronic sensor systems are mostly used for natural products,
which comprise of a large number of chemicals, and correlation
models are developed on the basis of one or two major chemicals
and, thus, the limitations of the trained model continues to be
there. Concretely, combining multiple articial sensing systems
enhances the performance of classication or quality evaluation of
the products under consideration, but the combined system are still
in the premature stage and with more research in this area would
make numerous applications successful
in the coming years
(Banerjee et al., 2016).

7. Conclusion and future Trends

Traditionally, food quality evaluation has been performed by
panels of trained human experts; despite this approach still suffers
from several disadvantages, such as being time consuming,
expensive and subjective, it is the most common used. On the other
hand, also instrumental standard methods, relying on precision
laboratory devices, suffers of similar drawbacks, being time-
consuming, labour intensive and expensive. In recent years, hu-
man senses were substituted with articial sensors, which have
been increasingly employed in the food industry for quality control
purposes; process, freshness and maturity monitoring; shelf life
investigations; authenticity assessments and microbial pathogen
detection. Electronic senses offers various advantages over tradi-
tional analysis, such as the rapidness, preciseness, objectiveness,
efciency and non-destruction of the measurement with low cost,
environmentally friendly nature and no sample pre-treatment.
Nevertheless, the permanent storage of data and the possibility of
automation for on-line monitoring of industrial scale operations
should be considered. These techniques used all together are called
¡°electronic panel¡± and this approach is possible due to the fusion of
data coming from complementary sensors. Data fusion has been
applied to a wide range of food and beverages to authenticate origin
and assess quality, enhancing signicantly the performance of
classication or quality evaluation. Most of the analysis combine
gas and liquid sensors and, sometimes, UVeVis spectroscopy or
CVSs, considered as an E-eye. Despite the promising results ob-
tained so far, there is still room for improvement. Novel articial
sensing devices, such as E-Noses and E-Tongues based on hybrid or
bioelectronic sensors, are being studied. Hybrid systems are
equipped with a combination of different sensor technologies,
incorporating the advantages inherent to the different transducers
and, at the same time, giving a choice for which chemical sensors
can be used. Even with technological advances and promising re-
sults, these sensors still cannot mimic the biological features of
human counterparts. Bioelectronic systems can provide signals
triggered by the binding activities between selective receptors and
odorous compounds or tastants. Recently, bioelectronic noses, us-
ing human olfactory receptors as primary recognition elements and
nanomaterials as secondary transducers, have been reported (Yoon
et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2008, Lee et al., 2012b, c; Jin et al., 2012; Park
et al., 2012a). Bioelectronic noses rapidly recognize target mole-
cules and can be operated relatively simply. In addition, they can be
easily integrated and multiplexed into small chips that enable the

systems to be portable and, thus, suitable for on-site analysis (Son
et al., 2017). Beyond human receptors, some efforts to design bio-
electronic noses have used olfactory receptors of various mammals,
such as dogs and mice, which perform better than humans in smell
sensing (Park et al., 2012b; Goldsmith et al., 2011). Nevertheless,
electronic mucosa, which is an improvement of the E-Nose tech-
nology, was developed. In this instrument, the sensor arrays have
been combined with two retentive columns (mimicking two nasal
paths) in order to add another dimension to the common E-Nose,
using temporal information from sensors. The retentive columns,
coated with an absorbent material, acts like the mucous layer in the
nasal cavity by delaying selectively some odour molecules, while
letting other pass through with minimal delay. This provides dif-
ferential temporal data, which are complementary to the conven-
tional response (Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti and Aghbashlo, 2014;
Gardner et al., 2012). In addition to these, considered as the evo-
lution of traditional instruments, tactile sensors are being devel-
oped, e.g., Nakamoto et al. (2015) presented the prototype of a
sensor,
inspired by human teeth, successfully applied to food
texture measurements. Moreover, also data fusion strategies are
object of investigations. Borras et al. (2015) identied several future
trends, including combination of low and mid-level data fusion,
fusion of second and higher-order data, i.e., hyperspectral images or
data from hyphenated techniques, and the combination of rst
order-data from evolving systems, i.e., on-line monitored systems.

Declaration of interest

The authors declare no conict of interest.

Acknowledgements

This research did not receive any specic grant from funding
agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-prot sectors.

References

Abdi, H., 2010. Partial least squares regression and projection on latent structure
regression. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Comput. Stat. 2 (1), 97e106. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/wics.51.
Albert, K.J., Lewis, N.S., Schauer, C.L., Sotzing, G.A., Stitzel, S.E., Vaid, T.P., Walt, D.R.,
2000. Cross-reactive chemical sensor arrays. Chem. Rev. 100 (7), 2595e2626.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/cr980102.
Ampuero, S., Bosset, J.O., 2003. The electronic nose applied to dairy products: a
review. Sensors Actuators B 94 (1), 1e12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0925-
4005(03)00321-6.
Apetrei, I.M., Rodriguez-Mendez, M.L., Apetrei, C., de Saja, J., 2013. Fish freshness
monitoring using an E-tongue based on polypyrrole modied screen-printed
electrodes.
IEEE Sensors J. 13 (7), 2548e2554. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JSEN.2013.2253317.
Apetrei,
I.M., Apetrei, C., 2016. Application of voltammetric e-tongue for the
detection of ammonia and putrescine in beef products. Sensors Actuators B 234,
371e379. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2016.05.005.
Arivazhagan, S., Shebiah, R.N., Sudharsan, H., Kannan, R.R., Ramesh, R., 2013.
External and internal defect detection of egg using machine vision. J. Emerg.
Trends Comput. Inf. Sci. 4 (3), 257e262.
Avila, M.M., Caballero, D., Duran, M.L., Caro, A., Perez-Palacios, T., Antequera, T.,
2015. Including 3D-textures in a computer vision system to analyze quality
traits of loin. Comput. Vis. Syst. 9163, 456e465. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-
3-319-20904-3_41.
Balaban, M.O., Sengor, G.F.U., Soriano, M.G., Ruiz, E.G., 2011. Quantication of
gaping, bruising and blood spots in salmon llets using image analysis. J. Food
Sci. 76 (3), 291e297. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-3841.2011.02060.x.
Banerjee, R., Tudu, B., Bandyopadhyay, R., Bhattacharyya, N., 2016. A review on
combined odor and taste sensor systems. J. Food Eng. 190, 10e21. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2016.06.001.
Basheer,
I.A., Hajmeer, M., 2000. Articial neural networks:
fundamentals,
computing, design and application. J. Microbiol. Methods 43 (1), 3e31. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0167-7012(00)00201-3.
Borras, E., Ferre, J., Boque, R., Mestres, M., Acena, L., Busto, O., 2015. Data fusion
methodologies for food and beverage authentication and quality assessment e
a
review.
Anal.
Chim.
Acta
891,
1e14.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.aca.2015.04.042.

72

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

Bougrini, M., Tahri, K., Haddi, Z., El Bari, N., Llobet, E.,
Jaffrezic-Renault, N.,
Bouchikhi, B., 2014. Aging time and brand determination of pasteurized milk
using a multisensor e-nose combined with a voltammetric e-tongue. Mater. Sci.
Eng. C 45, 348e358. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.msec.2014.09.030.
Branciari, R., Valiani, A., Trabalza-Marinucci, M., Miraglia, D., Ranucci, D., Acuti, G.,
Esposto, S., Mughetti, L., 2012. Consumer acceptability of ovine cheese from
ewes fed extruded linseed-enriched diets. Small Ruminant Res. 106, 43e48.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.smallrumres.2012.04.032.
Brosnan, T., Sun, D.-W., 2004. Improving quality inspection of food products by
computer vision e a review. J. Food Eng. 61, 3e16. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0260-8774(03)00183-3.
Cevoli, C., Cerretani, L., Gori, A., Gallina Toschi, T., Fabbri, A., 2011. Classication of
Pecorino cheeses using electronic nose combined with articial neural network
and comparison with GCeMS analysis of volatile compounds. Food Chem. 129
(3), 1315e1319. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2011.05.126.
Ceto, X., Gutierrez, J.M., Moreno-Baron, L., Alegret, S., del Valle, M., 2010. Voltam-
metric electronic tongue in the analysis of Cava wines. Electroanalysis 23 (1),
72e78. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/elan.201000439.
Cheng, H., Qin, Z.H., Guo, X.F., Hu, X.S., Wu, J.H., 2013. Geographical origin identi-
cation of propolis using GCeMS and electronic nose combined with principal
component analysis. Food Res. Int. 51 (2), 813e822. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodres.2013.01.053.
Cheng, J.-H., Sun, D.-W., Pu, H.-B., Wang, Q.-J., Chen, Y.-N., 2015. Suitability of
hyperspectral imaging for rapid evaluation of thiobarbituric acid (TBA) value in
grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) llet. Food Chem. 171, 258e265. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.08.124.
Chmiel, M., Slowinski, M., Dasiewicz, K., 2011a. Application of computer vision
systems for estimation of fat content in poultry meat. Food Control. 22 (8),
1424e1427. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.03.002.
Chmiel, M., Slowinski, M., Dasiewicz, K., 2011b. Lightness of the color measured by
computer image analysis as a factor for assessing the quality of pork meat. Meat
Sci. 88 (3), 566e570. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.02.014.
Chmiel, M., Slowinski, M., 2016. The use of computer vision system to detect pork
defects. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 73, 473e480. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.lwt.2016.06.054.
Chmiel, M., Slowinski, M., Dasiewicz, K., Florowski, T., 2016. Use of computer vision
system (CVS)
for detection of PSE pork meat obtained from m. semi-
membranosus. LWT - Food Sci. Technol. 65, 532e536. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.lwt.2015.08.021.
Ciosek, P., Wroblewski, W., 2007. Sensor arrays for liquid sensing - electronic tongue
systems. Analyst 132, 963e978. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/B705107G.
Ciosek, P., Wroblewski, W., 2011. Potentiometric electronic tongue for foodstuff and
biosample recognition - an overview. Sensors 11 (5), 4688e4701. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3390/s110504688.
Cubero, S., Aleixos, N., Molto, E., Gomez-Sanchis, J., Blasco, J., 2011. Advances in
machine vision applications for automatic inspection and quality evaluation of
fruits and vegetables. Food Bioprocess Technol. 4 (4), 487e504. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11947-010-0411-8.
Dang, Y., Gao, X., Ma, F., Wu, X., 2015. Comparison of umami taste peptides in water-
soluble extractions of Jinhua and Parma hams. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 60
(2e2), 1179e1186. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2014.09.014.
Debska, B., Guzowska-Swider, B., 2011. Application of articial neural network in
food classication. Anal. Chim. Acta 705 (1e2), 283e291. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.aca.2011.06.033.
Di Rosa, A.R., Liotta, L., Velez-Cervera, N., Lo Presti, V., Chiofalo, V., 2015. E-nose for
discrimination of cow feeding with olive by products from cheese. In: 15th
International Symposium on Olfaction and Electronic Nose (ISOEN), Dijon,
France.
Doeswijk, T.G., Smilde, A.K., Hagemann, J.A., Westerhuis, J.A., van Eeuwijk, F.A., 2011.
On the increase of predictive performance with high-level data fusion. Anal.
Chim. Acta 705 (1e2), 41e47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2011.03.025.
Dowlati, M., Mohtasebi, S.S., Omid, M., Razavi, S.H., Jamzad, M., de la Guardia, M.,
2013. Freshness assessment of gilthead sea bream (Sparus aurata) by machine
vision based on gill and eye color changes. J. Food Eng. 119 (2), 277e287. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.05.023.
Du, L., Chai, C., Guo, M., Lu, X., 2015. A model for discrimination freshness of shrimp.
Sens. Bio-Sensing Res. 6, 28e32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.sbsr.2015.11.001.
Elmenreich, W., 2002. Principles of Sensor Fusion. Sensor Fusion in Time-triggered
Systems,
pp.
7e16.
https://mobile.aau.at/~welmenre/papers/elmenreich_
Dissertation_sensorFusionInTimeTriggeredSystems.pdf.
Escriche, I., Kadar, M., Domenech, E., Gil-Sanchez, L., 2012. A potentiometric elec-
tronic tongue for the discrimination of honey according to the botanical origin.
Comparison with traditional methodologies: physicochemical parameters and
volatile prole.
J. Food Eng. 109 (3), 449e456. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2011.10.036.
Escuder-Gilabert, L., Peris, M., 2010. Review: highlights in recent applications of
electronic tongues in food analysis. Anal. Chim. Acta 665 (1), 15e25. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2010.03.017.
Gan, Z., Yang, Y., Li, J., Wen, X., Zhu, M., Jiang, Y., Ni, Y., 2016. Using sensor and
spectral analysis to classify botanical origin and determine adulteration of raw
honey.
J.
Food
Eng.
178,
151e158.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2016.01.016.
Gardner, J.W., Bartlett, P.N., 1994. A brief history of electronic noses. Sensors Ac-
tuators B 18e19 (1), 210e211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0925-4005(94)87085-3.
Gardner, J.W., Covington, J.A., Harun, F.K.C., 2012. Electronic mucosa: a natural

successor to the electronic nose system?. In: Human Olfactory Displays and
Interfaces: Odor Sensing and Presentation. IGI Global, pp. 257e274. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4018/978-1-4666-2521-1.ch012.
Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti, M., Mohtasebi, S.S., Rodriguez-Mendez, M.L., Lozano, J.,
Razavi, S.H., Ahmadi, H., 2011. Potential application of electronic nose tech-
nology in brewery. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 22 (4), 165e174. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.tifs.2010.12.005.
Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti, M., Aghbashlo, M., 2014. Electronic nose and electronic
mucosa as innovative instruments for real-time monitoring of food dryers.
Trends
Food Sci. Technol. 38 (2), 158e166. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.tifs.2014.05.004.
Gil, L., Barat, J.M., Baigt, D., Martinez-Manez, R., Soto, J., Garcia-Breijo, E., Aristoy, M.-
C., Toldra, F., Llobet, E., 2011. Monitoring of physicalechemical and microbio-
logical changes in fresh pork meat under cold storage by means of a potenti-
ometric electronic tongue. Food Chem. 126 (3), 1261e1268. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.foodchem.2010.11.054.
Gil-Sanchez, L., Garrigues,
J., Garcia-Breijo, E., Grau, R., Alino, M., Baigts, D.,
Barat, J.M., 2015. Articial neural networks (Fuzzy ARTMAP) analysis of the data
obtained with an electronic tongue applied to a ham-curing process with
different salt formulations. Appl. Soft Comput. 30, 421e429. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.asoc.2014.12.037.
Girolami, A., Napolitano, F., Faraone, D., Braghieri, A., 2013. Measurement of meat
color using a computer vision system. Meat Sci. 93 (1), 111e118. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2012.08.010.
Girolami, A., Napolitano, F., Faraone, D., Di Bello, G., Braghieri, A., 2014. Image
analysis with the computer vision system and the consumer test in evaluating
the appearance of Lucanian dry sausage. Meat Sci. 96 (1), 610e616. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.08.006.
Goldsmith, B.R., Mitala,
J.J.,
Josue,
J., Castro, A., Lerner, M.B., Bayburt, T.H.,
Khamis, S.M., Jones, R.A., Brand, J.G., Sligar, S.G., Luetje, C.W., Gelperin, A.,
Rhodes, P.A., Discher, B.M., Johnson, C., 2011. Biomimetic chemical sensors using
nanoelectronic readout of olfactory receptor proteins. ACS Nano 5 (7),
5408e5416. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/nn200489j.
Gonzalez-Martin, I., Perez-Pavon, J.L., Gonzalez-Perez, C., Hernandez-Mendez, J.,
Alvarez-Garcia, N., 2000. Differentiation of products derived from Iberian breed
swine by electronic olfactometry. Anal. Chim. Acta 424 (12), 279e287. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-2670(00)01106-5.
Goyal, S., Goyal, G.K., 2011. Cascade and feedforward backpropagation articial
neural network models for prediction of sensory quality of instant coffee
avoured sterilized drink. Can. J. Artif. Intell. Mach. Learn. Pattern Recognit. 2
(6), 78e82.
Gunasekaran, S., 1996. Computer vision technology for food quality assurance.
Trends Food Sci. Technol. 7 (8), 245e256. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0924-
2244(96)10028-5.
Ha, D., Sun, Q., Su, K., Wan, H., Li, H., Xu, N., Sun, F., Zhuang, L., Hu, N., Wang, P., 2015.
Recent achievements in electronic tongue and bioelectronic tongue as taste
sensors. Sensors Actuators B 207, 1136e1146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.snb.2014.09.077.
Hall, D.L., Llinas, J., 1997. An introduction to multisensor data fusion. Proc. IEEE 85
(1), 6e23. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/5.554205.
Han, F., Huang, X., Teye, E., Gu, F., Gu, H., 2014. Nondestructive detection of sh
freshness during its preservation by combining electronic nose and electronic
tongue techniques in conjunction with chemometric analysis. Anal. Methods 6
(2), 529e536. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C3AY41579A.
Hayashi, K., Yamanaka, M., Toko, K., Yamafuji, K., 1990. Multichannel taste sensor
using lipid membranes. Sensors Actuators B 2 (3), 205e213. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/0925-4005(90)85006-K.
Haykin, S., 1994. Neural Networks: a Comprehensive Foundation, 2d ed. Pearson
Education, Inc.
Hilding-Ohlsson, A., Fuerbach, J.A., Sacco, N.J., Bonetto, M.C., Corton, E., 2012. Vol-
tammetric discrimination of urea and melanin adulterated skimmed milk
powder. Sensors 12 (9), 12220e12234. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s120912220.
Hosseinpour, S., Raee, S., Mohtasebi, S.S., Aghbashlo, M., 2013. Application of
computer vision technique for on-line monitoring of shrimp color changes
during drying.
J. Food Eng. 115 (1), 99e114. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2012.10.003.
Hu, J., Li, D., Duan, Q., Han, Y., Chen, G., Si, X., 2012. Fish species classication by
color, texture and multi-class support vector machine using computer vision.
Comput.
Electron.
Agric.
88,
133e140.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.compag.2012.07.008.
Huang, L., Zhao, J., Chen, Q., Zhang, Y., 2014. Nondestructive measurement of total
volatile basic nitrogen (TVB-N) in pork meat by integrating near infrared
spectroscopy, computer vision and electronic nose techniques. Food Chem. 145,
228e236. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.06.073.
Huang, L., Liu, H., Zhang, B., Wu, D., 2015. Application of electronic nose with
multivariate analysis and sensor selection for botanical
identication and
quality determination of honey. Food Bioprocess Technol. 8 (2), 359e370.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11947-014-1407-6.
Huang, X., Xu, H., Wu, L., Dai, H., Yao, L., Han, F., 2016. A data fusion detection
method for sh freshness based on computer vision and near-infrared spec-
troscopy. Anal. Methods 8 (14), 2929e2935. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/
C5AY03005F.
James, D., Scott, S.M., Ali, Z., O¡¯Hare, W.T., 2005. Chemical sensors for electronic nose
systems. Microchim. Acta 149 (1), 1e17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00604-004-
0291-6.

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

73

Jin, H.J., Lee, S.H., Kim, T.H., Song, H.S., Park, T.H., Hong, S., 2012. Nanovesicle-based
bioelectronic nose platform mimicking human olfactory signal transduction.
Biosens.
Bioelectron.
35
(1),
335e341.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.bios.2012.03.012.
Kealesitse, B., Kabama, I.O., 2012. Exploring the inuence of quality and safety on
consumers¡¯ food purchase decisions in Botswana. Int. J. Bus. Adm. 3 (2), 90.
Kiani, S., Minaei, S., Ghasemi-Varnamkhasti, M., 2016. Fusion of articial senses as a
robust approach to food quality assessment. J. Food Eng. 171, 230e239. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2015.10.007.
Kim, H.-W., Choi, J.-H., Choi, Y.-S., Kim, H.-Y., Lee, M.-L., Hwang, K.-E., Song, D.-H.,
Lee, J.-W., Kim, C.-J., 2014. Effects of kimchi and smoking on quality charac-
teristics and shelf life of cooked sausages prepared with irradiated pork. Meat
Sci. 96 (1), 548e553. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.08.023.
Kim, T.H., Lee, S.H., Lee, J., Song, H.S., Oh, E.H., Park, T.H., Hong, S., 2008. Single-
carbon-atomic-resolution detection of odorant molecules using a human ol-
factory receptor-based bioelectronic nose. Adv. Mater. 21 (1), 91e94. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1002/adma.200801435.
Kodogiannis, V.S., 2016. A rapid detection of meat spoilage using an electronic nose
and fuzzy-wavelet systems. In: SAI Intelligent System Conference (IntelliSys),
London, UK.
Krutz, G.W., Gibson, H.G., Cassens, D.L., Zhang, M., 2000. Colour vision in forest and
wood engineering. Landwards 55 (1), 2e9.
Kuncheva, L.I., 2004. Combining Pattern Classiers: Methods And Algorithms. John
Wiley and Sons. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118914564.
Larsen, A.B.L., Hviid, M.S., Jorgensen, M.E., Larsen, R., Dahl, A.L., 2014. Vision-based
method for tracking meat cuts in slaughterhouses. Meat Sci. 96 (1), 366e372.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.07.023.
Laureati, M., Buratti, S., Giovanelli, G., Corazzin, M., Lo Fiego, D.P., Pagliarini, E., 2014.
Characterization and differentiation of Italian Parma, San Daniele and Toscano
dry-cured hams: a multi-disciplinary approach. Meat Sci. 96 (1), 288e294.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.07.014.
Lee, D.-J., Xiong, G., Lane, R.M., Zhang, D., 2012a. An efcient shape analysis method
for shrimp quality evaluation. In: 12th International Conference on Control,
Automation, Robotics and Vision (ICARCV), Guangzhou, China. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICARCV.2012.6485271.
Lee, S.H., Kwon, O.S., Song, H.S., Park, S.J., Sung, J.H., Jang, J., Park, T.H., 2012b.
Mimicking the human smell sensing mechanism with an articial nose plat-
form.
Biomaterials
33
(6),
1722e1729.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2011.11.044.
Lee, S.H., Jin, H.J., Song, H.S., Hong, S., Park, T.H., 2012c. Bioelectronic nose with high
sensitivity and selectivity using chemically functionalized carbon nanotube
combined with human olfactory receptor. J. Biotechnol. 157 (4), 467e472.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiotec.2011.09.011.
Li, L., Yu, Y., Yang, J., Yang, R., Dong, G., Jin, T., 2015. Voltammetric electronic tongue
for the qualitative analysis of milk adulterated with urea combined with multi-
way data analysis. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 10 (7), 5970e5980.
Li, M., Wang, H., Sun, L., Zhao, G., Huang, X., 2016. Application of electronic nose for
measuring total volatile basic nitrogen and total viable counts in packaged pork
during refrigerated storage. J. Food Sci. 81 (4), 906e912. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1111/1750-3841.13238.
Liu, P., Tu, K., 2012. Prediction of TVB-N content in eggs based on electronic nose.
Food Control. 23 (1), 177e183. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2011.07.006.
Li, S., Ma, C., Liu, Z., Gong, G., Xu, Z., Xu, A., Hua, B., 2014. Flavor analysis of stirred
yoghurt with cheddar cheese adding into milk. Food Sci. Technol. Res. 20 (5),
939e946. http://dx.doi.org/10.3136/fstr.20.939.
Li, Y., Dhakal, S., Peng, Y., 2012. A machine vision system for identication of micro-
crack in egg shell. J. Food Eng. 109 (1), 127e134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2011.09.024.
Liu, H., Sun, J., Liu, L., Zhang, H., 2009. Feature selection with dynamic mutual in-
formation. Pattern Recognit. 42 (7), 1330e1339. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.patcog.2008.10.028.
Lorenzen, P.C., Walte, H.-G., Bosse, B., 2013. Development of a method for butter
type differentiation by electronic nose technology. Sensors Actuators B 181,
690e693. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.snb.2013.01.034.
Lout, A., Coradeschi, S., Mani, G.K., Shankar, P., Balaguru Rayappan, J.B., 2015.
Electronic noses for food quality: a review. J. Food Eng. 144, 103e111. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2014.07.019.
Ma, J., Sun, D.-W., Qu, J.-H., Liu, D., Pu, H., Gao, W.-H., Zeng, X.-A., 2016. Applications
of computer vision for assessing quality of agri-food: a review of recent
research advances. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 56 (1), 113e127. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/10408398.2013.873885.
Ma, J., Sun, D.-W., Pu, H., 2017. Model improvement for predicting moisture content
(MC) in pork longissimus dorsi muscles under diverse processing conditions by
hyperspectral
imaging.
J. Food Eng. 196, 65e72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2016.10.016.
Maamor, H.N., Rashid, F.N.A., Zakaria, N.Z.I., Zakaria, A., Kamarudin, L.M.,
Jaafar, M.N., Shakaff, A.Y., Subari, N., Yusuf, N., Ismail, S.W.M., Adnan, K.N.A.K.,
2014. Bio-inspired taste assessment of pure and adulterated honey using multi-
sensing technique.
In: 2nd International Conference on Electronic Design
(ICED), Penang, Malaysia. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICED.2014.7015812.
Marsili, R.T., 1999. SPME-MS-MVA as an electronic nose for the study of off-avours
in milk.
J. Agric. Food Chem. 47 (2), 648e654. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
jf9807925.
Martinez, A.M., Kak, A.C., 2001. PCA versus LDA. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell. 23 (2), 228e233.

Masnan, M.J., Mahat, N.I., Zakaria, A., Shakaff, A.Y.M., Adom, A.H., Sa¡¯ad, F.S.A., 2012.
Enhancing classication performance of multisensory data trough extraction
and selection of features. Procedia Chem. 6, 132e140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.proche.2012.10.139.
Mitchell, H.B., 2007. Multi-sensor Data Fusion - an Introduction, rst ed. Springer-
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 3e13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-
71559-7.
Mohareb, F., Papadopoulou, O., Panagou, E., Nychas, G.-J., Bessant, C., 2016.
Ensemble-based support vector machine classiers as an efcient tool for
quality assessment of beef llets from electronic nose data. Anal. Methods 8,
3711e3721. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C6AY00147E.
Mortensen, A.K., Lisouski, P., Ahrendt, P., 2016. Weight prediction of broiler chickens
using 3D computer vision. Comput. Electron. Agric. 123, 319e326. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2016.03.011.
Nagle, H.T., Gutierrez-Osuna, R., Schiffman, S.S., 2002. The how and why of elec-
tronic noses. IEEE Spectr. 35 (9), 22e31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/6.715180.
Nakamoto, H., Nishikubo, D., Kobayashi, F., Kojima, F., 2015. Development of food
texture sensor using two magnetic sensing elements. In: IEEE Symposium Se-
ries on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Cape Town, South Africa. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/SSCI.2015.27.
Nateghi, L., Roohinejad, S., Totosaus, A., Mirhosseini, H., Shuhaimi, M.,
Meimandipour, A., Omidizadeh, A., Manap, Y.A., 2012. Optimization of textural
properties and formulation of reduced fat Cheddar cheeses containing fat re-
placers. J. Food, Agric. Environ. 10 (2), 59e63.
Neely, K., Taylor, C., Prosser, O., Hamlyn, P.F., 2001. Assessment of cooked alpaca and
llama meats from the statistical analysis of data collected using an ¡®electronic
nose¡¯. Meat Sci. 58 (1), 53e58. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0309-1740(00)00130-
3.
Nielsen, S., 2010. Food Analysis, fourth ed. Springer US. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/
978-1-4419-1478-1.
Nurjuliana, M., Che Man, Y.B., Mat Hashim, D., Mohamed, A.K.S., 2011. Rapid iden-
tication of pork for halal authentication using the electronic nose and gas
chromatography mass spectrometer with headspace analyzer. Meat Sci. 88 (4),
638e644. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.02.022.
Olafsson, R., Martinsdottir, E., Olafsdottir, G., Sigfusson, P.I., Gardner, J.W., 1992.
Monitoring of sh freshness using tin oxide sensors. Sensors Sens. Syst. Elec-
tron. Nose 212, 257e272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-7985-8_16.
Omid, M., Soltani, M., Dehrouyeh, M.H., Mohtasebi, S.S., Ahmadi, H., 2013. An expert
egg grading system based on machine vision and articial intelligence tech-
niques.
J.
Food
Eng.
118
(1),
70e77.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2013.03.019.
Ottavian, M., Fasolato, L., Serva, L., Facco, P., Barolo, M., 2014. Data fusion for food
authentication: fresh/frozen-thawed discrimination in west african goatsh
(Pseudupeneus prayensis) llets. Food Bioprocess Technol. 7 (4), 1025e1036.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11947-013-1157-x.
Pan, L.-Q., Zhan, G., Tu, K., Tu, S., Liu, P., 2011. Eggshell crack detection based on
computer vision and acoustic response by means of back-propagation articial
neural network. Eur. Food Res. Technol. 233, 457e463. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s00217-011-1530-9.
Papadopoulou, O.S., Panagou, E.Z., Mohareb, F.R., Nychas, G.-J.E., 2013. Sensory and
microbiological quality assessment of beef llets using a portable electronic
nose in tandem with support vector machine analysis. Food Res. Int. 50 (1),
241e249. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodres.2012.10.020.
Park, B., Chen, Y.R., Nguyen, M., Hwang, H., 1996. Characterising multispectral im-
ages of tumorous, bruised, skin-torn, and wholesome poultry carcasses. Trans.
Am. Soc. Agric. Eng. 39 (5), 1933e1941.
Park, S.J., Kwon, O.S., Lee, S.H., Song, H.S., Park, T.H., Jang, J., 2012a. Ultrasensitive
exible graphene based eld-effect transistor (FET)-type bioelectronic nose.
Nano Lett. 12 (10), 5082e5090. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/nl301714x.
Park, K., Lim, J.H., Jin, H.J., Namgung, S., Lee, S.H., Park, T.H., Hong, S., 2012b.
A bioelectronic sensor based on canine olfactory nanovesicleecarbon nanotube
hybrid structures for the fast assessment of food quality. Analyst 137 (14),
3249e3254. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/C2AN16274A.
Peris, M., Escuder-Gilabert, L., 2013. On-line monitoring of food fermentation pro-
cesses using electronic noses and electronic tongues: a review. Anal. Chim. Acta
804 (4), 29e36. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2013.09.048.
Persaud, K., Dodd, G., 1982. Analysis of discrimination mechanisms in the
mammalian olfactory system using a model nose. Nature 299, 352e355. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1038/299352a0.
Piana, M.L., Persano Oddo, L., Bentabol, A., Bruneau, E., Bogdanov, S., Guyot
Declerck, C., 2004. Sensory analysis applied to honey: state of the art. Apido-
logie 35, 26e37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1051/apido:2004048.
Poonnoy, P., Chum-in, T., 2012. Estimation of sushi shrimp weight using image
analysis technique and non-linear regression models. In: International Con-
ference of Agricultural Engineering (CIGR-AGENG), Valencia, Spain.
Poonnoy, P., Yodkeaw, P., Sriwai, A., Umongkol, P., Intamoon, S., 2014. Classication
of boiled shrimp¡¯s shape using image analysis and articial neural network
model.
J. Food Process Eng. 37 (3), 257e263. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
jfpe.12081.
Raschka, S., 2014. Linear Discriminant Analysis. http://sebastianraschka.com/
Articles/2014_python_lda.html.
Rock, F., Barsan, N., Weimar, U., 2008. Electronic nose: current status and future
trends. Chem. Rev. 108 (2), 705e725. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/cr068121q.
Rodriguez-Mendez, M.L., Arrieta, A.A., Parra, V., Bernal, A., Vegas, A., Villanueva, S.,
Gutierrez-Osuna, R., de Saja, J.A., 2004. Fusion of three sensory modalities for

74

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

the multimodal characterization of red wines. IEEE Sensors J. 4 (3), 348e354.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2004.824236.
Rodriguez-Mendez, M.L., Apetrei, C., de Saja, J.A., 2008. Evaluation of the poly-
phenolic content of extra virgin olive oils using an array of voltammetric sen-
sors. Electrochim. Acta 53 (20), 5867e5872. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.electacta.2008.04.006.
Ruiz-Rico, M., Fuentes, A., Masot, R., Alcaniz, M., Fernandez-Segovia, I., Barat, J.M.,
2013. Use of the voltammetric tongue in fresh cod (Gadus morhua) quality
assessment.
Innovative Food Sci. Emerg. Technol. 18, 256e263. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ifset.2012.12.010.
Santonico, M., Sudano, A., Pennazza, G., Accoto, D., Grasso, S., Genova, F., Finazzi
Agro, A., Parente, F.R., Ferri, G., D¡¯Amico, A., 2015. A sensorial platform for
mozzarella cheese characterization and authentication. In: XVIII AISEM Annual
Conference, Trento, Italy. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/AISEM.2015.7066777.
Sberveglieri, V., Nunez Carmona, E., Zappa, D., Nocetti, M., Pulvirenti, A., 2015. MOX
NanoWire gas sensors array to detect the authenticity of grated Parmigiano-
Reggiano cheese. In: 15th International Symposium on Olfaction and Elec-
tronic Nose (ISOEN), Dijon, France.
Schaller, E., Bosset, J.O., Escher, F., 1998. ¡°Electronic noses¡± and their application to
food. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 31 (4), 305e316. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
fstl.1998.0376.
Shaee, S., Minaei, S., Moghaddam-Charkari, N., Barzegar, M., 2014. Honey char-
acterization using computer vision system and articial neural networks. Food
Chem. 159, 143e150. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.02.136.
Sliwinska, M., Wisniewska, P., Dymerski, T., Namiesnik, J., Wardenki, W., 2014. Food
analysis using articial senses. J. Agric. Food Chem. 62 (7), 1423e1448. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1021/jf403215y.
Smyth, H., Cozzolino, D., 2013. Instrumental methods (spectroscopy, electronic
nose, and tongue) as tools to predict taste and aroma in beverages: advantages
and limitations. Chem. Rev. 113 (3), 1429e1440. http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/
cr300076c.
Soltani, M., Omid, M., Alimardani, R., 2014. Egg volume prediction using machine
vision technique based on pappus theorem and articial neural network. J. Food
Sci. Technol. 52 (5), 3065e3071. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s13197-014-1350-6.
Song, S., Yuan, L., Zhang, X., Hayat, K., Chen, H., Liu, F., Xiao, Z., Niu, Y., 2013. Rapid
measuring and modelling avour quality changes of oxidised chicken fat by
electronic nose proles through the partial least squares regression analysis.
Food
Chem.
141
(4),
4278e4288.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodchem.2013.07.009.
Son, M., Lee, J.Y., Ko, H.J., Park, T.H., 2017. Bioelectronic nose: an emerging tool for
odour standardization. Trends Biotechnol. 35 (4), 301e307. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.tibtech.2016.12.007.
Sonka, M., Hlavac, V., Boyle, R., 1993. Image Processing, Analysis and Machine
Vision, rst ed. Springer, US, pp. 1e12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4899-
3216-7.
Subari, N., Saleh, J.M., Shakaff, A.Y.M., Zakaria, A., 2012. A hybrid sensing approach
for pure and adulterated honey classication. Sensors 12 (10), 14022e14040.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s121014022.
Subari, N., Saleh, J.M., Shakaff, A.Y.M., 2014. Fusion technique for honey purity
estimation using articial neural network. In: 2d International Conference on
Advances in Intelligent Systems in Bioinformatics, Chem-informatics, Business
Intelligence. Social Media and Cybernetics (IntelSys), Jakarta, Indonesia.
Sun, D.-W., 2000. Inspecting pizza topping percentage and distribution by a com-
puter vision method. J. Food Eng. 44 (4), 245e249. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0260-8774(00)00024-8.
Sun, H.-M., Wang, J.-Z., Zhang, C.-H., Li, X., Xu, X., Dong, X.-B., Hu, L., Li, C.-H., 2014.
Changes of avour compounds of hydrolyzed chicken bone extracts during
Maillard reaction. J. Food Sci. 79 (12), 2415e2426. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
1750-3841.12689.
Sun, X., Chen, K., Berg, E.P., Magolski, J.D., 2011. Predicting fresh beef colour grade
using machine vision imagine and support vector machine (SVM) analysis.
J. Animal Veterinary Adv. 10 (12), 1504e1511. http://dx.doi.org/10.3923/
javaa.2011.1504.1511.
Sun, X., Young, J., Liu, J.H., Bachmeier, L., Somers, R.M., Chen, K.J., Newman, D., 2016.
Prediction of pork color attributes using computer vision system. Meat Sci. 113,
62e64. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2015.11.009.
Tahara, Y., Nakashi, K., Ji, K., Ikeda, A., Toko, K., 2013. Development of a portable
taste sensor with a lipid/polymer membrane. Sensors 13 (1), 1076e1084. http://
dx.doi.org/10.3390/s130101076.
Tang, X., Sun, X., Wu, V.C.H., Xie, J., Pan, Y., Zhao, Y., Malakar, P.K., 2013. Predicting
shelf-life of chilled pork sold in China. Food Control. 32 (1), 334e340. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodcont.2012.12.010.
Tarbell, K.A., Reid, J.F., 1991. A computer vision system for characterising corn
growth and development. Trans. Am. Soc. Agric. Eng. 34 (5), 2245e2249.
Tian, X., Wang, J., Cui, S., 2013. Analysis of pork adulteration in minced mutton using
electronic nose of metal oxide sensors. J. Food Eng. 119 (4), 744e749. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jfoodeng.2013.07.004.
Tian, X.-Y., Cai, Q., Zhang, Y.-M., 2012. Rapid classication of hairtail sh and pork
freshness using an electronic nose based on the PCA method. Sensors 12 (1),
260e277. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s120100260.
Timmermans, A.J.M., 1998. Computer vision system for on-line sorting of pot plants
based on learning techniques. Acta Hortic. 421, 91e98. http://dx.doi.org/
10.17660/ActaHortic.1998.421.8.
Toko, K., Tahara, Y., Habara, M., Kobayashi, Y., Ikezaki, H., 2016. Taste sensor: elec-
tronic tongue with global selectivity. In: Nakamoto, T. (Ed.), Essentials of

Machine Olfaction and Taste. Wiley, pp. 87e174.
Ulloa, P.A., Guerra, R., Cavaco, A.M., da Costa, A.M.R., Figuera, A.C., Brigas, A.F., 2013.
Determination of the botanical origin of honey by sensor fusion of impedance
e-tongue and optical spectroscopy. Comput. Electron. Agric. 94, 1e11. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2013.03.001.
Vestergaard, J.S., Martens, M., Turkki, P., 2007. Application of an electronic nose
system for prediction of sensory quality changes of a meat product (pizza
topping) during storage. LWT e Food Sci. Technol. 40 (6), 1095e1101. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lwt.2006.06.008.
Visser, F.R., Taylor, M., 1998. Improved performance of the Aromascan A32S Elec-
tronic Nose and its potential for detecting aroma differences in diary products.
J.
Sens.
Stud.
13
(1),
95e120.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-
459X.1998.tb00077.x.
Wadehra, A., Patil, P.S., 2016. Application of electronic tongue in food processing.
Anal. Methods 8 (3), 474e480. http://dx.doi.org/10.1039/c5ay02724a.
Wang, D., Wang, X., Liu, T., Liu, Y., 2012. Prediction of total viable counts on chilled
pork using an electronic nose combined with support vector machine. Meat Sci.
90 (2), 373e377. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.meatsci.2011.07.025.
Wang, Q., Jin, G., Ma, M., Wang, N., Liu, C., He, L., 2014. Discriminating eggs from
different poultry species by fatty acids and volatiles proling: comparison of
SPME-GC/MS, electronic nose, and principal component analysis method. Eur. J.
Lipid Sci. Technol. 116 (8), 1044e1053. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ejlt.201400016.
Wei, Z., Wang, J., 2011. Detection of antibiotic residues in bovine milk by a vol-
tammetric electronic tongue system. Anal. Chim. Acta 694 (1e2), 46e56. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.aca.2011.02.053.
Wei, Z., Wang, J., Zhang, X., 2013a. Monitoring of quality and storage time of un-
sealed pasteurized milk by voltammetric electronic tongue. Electrochim. Acta
88, 231e239. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.electacta.2012.10.042.
Wei, Z., Wang, J., Jin, W., 2013b. Evaluation of varieties of set yogurts and their
physical properties using a voltammetric electronic tongue based on various
potential waveforms. Sensors Actuators B 177, 684e694. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.snb.2012.11.056.
Wei, Z., Wang, J., 2014. Tracing oral and geographical origins of honeys by
potentiometric and voltammetric electronic tongue. Comput. Electron. Agric.
108, 112e122. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.compag.2014.07.014.
Wei, Z., Zhang, W., Wang, Y., Wang, J., 2017. Monitoring the fermentation, post-
ripeness and storage processes of set yogurt using voltammetric electronic
tongue.
J.
Food
Eng.
203,
41e52.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jfoodeng.2017.01.022.
Wilson, A.D., Baietto, M., 2009. Applications and advances in electronic-nose
technology. Sensors 9 (7), 5099e5148. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s90705099.
Wilson, A.D., Oberle, C.S., Oberle, D.F., 2013. Detection of off-avor in catsh using a
conducting polymer electronic-nose technology. Sensors 13 (12), 15968e15984.
http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/s131215968.
Winquist, F., Hornsten, E.G., Sundgren, H., Lundstrom, I., 1993. Performance of an
electronic nose for quality estimation of ground meat. Meas. Sci. Technol. 4 (12),
1493e1500. http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/0957-0233/4/12/029.
Winquist, F., Wide, P., Lundstrom, I., 1997. An electronic tongue based on voltam-
metry. Anal. Chim. Acta 357 (1e2), 21e31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0003-
2670(97)00498-4.
Wu, D., Sun, D.-W., 2013. Colour measurements by computer vision for food quality
control - a review. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 29 (1), 5e20. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.tifs.2012.08.004.
Xiao, Z., Wu, M., Niu, Y., Chen, F., Zhang, X., Zhu, J., Song, S., Zhu, G., 2015. Contri-
bution of chicken base addition to aroma characteristics of Maillard reaction
products based on gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, electronic nose,
and statistical analysis. Food Sci. Biotechnol. 24 (2), 411e419. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1007/s10068-015-0054-7.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Sun, Pu, H., Xie, A., Han, Z., Luo, M., 2015a. Non-destructive
prediction of thiobarbituric acid reactive substances (TBARS) value for freshness
evaluation of chicken meat using hyperspectral imaging. Food Chem. 179,
175e181. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2015.01.116.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Xie, A., Han, Z., Wang, L., 2015b. Potential of hyperspectral
imaging for rapid prediction of hydroxyproline content in chicken meat. Food
Chem. 175, 417e422. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.11.161.
Xiong, Z., Sun, D.-W., Xie, A., Pu, H., Han, Z., Luo, M., 2015c. Quantitative determi-
nation of total pigments in red meats using hyperspectral imaging and multi-
variate
analysis.
Food Chem. 178, 339e345. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.foodchem.2015.01.071.
Yoon, H., Lee, S.H., Kwon, O.S., Song, H.S., Oh, E.H., Park, T.H., Jang, J., 2009. Poly-
pyrrole nanotubes conjugated with human olfactory receptors: high-
performance transducers for FET-type bioelectronic noses. Angew. Chem. 48
(15), 2755e2758. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/anie.200805171.
Yu, Y., Zhao, H., Yang, R., Dong, G., Li, L., Yang, J., Jin, T., Zhang, W., Liu, Y., 2015. Pure
milk brands classication by means of a voltammetric electronic tongue and
multivariate analysis. Int. J. Electrochem. Sci. 10 (5), 4381e4392.
Zakaria, A., Shakaff, A.Y., Masnan, M.J., Ahmad, M.N., Adom, A.H., Jaafar, M.N.,
Ghani, S.A., Abdullah, A.H., Kamarudin, L.M., Subari, N., Fikri, N.A., 2011.
A biomimetic sensor for the classication of honeys of different oral origin and
the detection of adulteration. Sensors 11 (8), 7799e7822. http://dx.doi.org/
10.3390/s110807799.
Zhang, M., Wang, X., Liu, Y., Xu, X., Zhou, G., 2012. Species discrimination among
three kinds of puffer sh using an electronic nose combined with olfactory
sensory evaluation. Sensors 12 (9), 12562e12571. http://dx.doi.org/10.3390/
s120912562.

A.R. Di Rosa et al. / Journal of Food Engineering 210 (2017) 62e75

75

Zhang, X., Zhang, Y., Meng, Q., Ren, L., 2015. Evaluation of beef by electronic tongue
system TS-5000Z: avour assessment, recognition and chemical compositions
according to its correlation with avour. PLoS ONE 10 (9). http://dx.doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0137807.

Zou, Y., Wan, H., Zhang, X., Ha, D., Wang, P., 2015. Electronic nose and electronic
tongue. In: Wang, P., Liu, Q., Wu, C., Hsia, K.J. (Eds.), Bioinspired Smell and Taste
Sensors. Springer, Netherlands, pp. 19e44. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-94-
017-7333-1.

