Midgar: Detection of people through computer vision in the Internet of Things scenarios to improve the security in Smart Cities, Smart Towns, and Smart Homes

Cristian Gonz芍lez Garc赤a  , Daniel Meana-Llori芍n, B. Cristina Pelayo G-Bustelo,
Juan Manuel Cueva Lovelle, Nestor Garcia-Fernandez

University of Oviedo, Department of Computer Science, Sciences Building, C/Calvo Sotelo s/n 33007, Oviedo, Asturias, Spain

h i g h l i g h t s

 Using Computer Vision in the Internet of Things to automate actions.
 Using an IP Camera pictures as a sensor through the use of Computer Vision module.
 Method to improve the accuracy of Computer Vision models.
 A system to recognise people in private areas in Smart Cities and Smart Homes.

article

info


Article history:
Received 28 October 2015
Received in revised form
23 December 2016
Accepted 29 December 2016
Available online 5 January 2017

Keywords:
Smart Cities
Smart Towns
Smart Homes
Internet of Things
Smart Objects
Computer Vision
Surveillance
Security

abstract

Could we use Computer Vision in the Internet of Things for using pictures as sensors? This is the principal
hypothesis that we want to resolve. Currently, in order to create safety areas, cities, or homes, people use
IP cameras. Nevertheless, this system needs people who watch the camera images, watch the recording
after something occurred, or watch when the camera notifies them of any movement. These are the
disadvantages. Furthermore, there are many Smart Cities and Smart Homes around the world. This is why
we thought of using the idea of the Internet of Things to add a way of automating the use of IP cameras.
In our case, we propose the analysis of pictures through Computer Vision to detect people in the analysed
pictures. With this analysis, we are able to obtain if these pictures contain people and handle the pictures
as if they were sensors with two possible states. Notwithstanding, Computer Vision is a very complicated
field. This is why we needed a second hypothesis: Could we work with Computer Vision in the Internet
of Things with a good accuracy to automate or semi-automate this kind of events? The demonstration of
these hypotheses required a testing over our Computer Vision module to check the possibilities that we
have to use this module in a possible real environment with a good accuracy. Our proposal, as a possible
solution, is the analysis of entire sequence instead of isolated pictures for using pictures as sensors in the
Internet of Things.


1. Introduction

Currently, we live in the information era. We have many things
in our daily life with access to the Internet and capable of making
our daily life more comfortable like smartphones, tablets, comput-
ers, some cars, Smart TVs, and so on. Every new day, we have more
devices and better Internet connection [1]. These devices are able
to run programmes, which use the devices＊ sensors, or to do other
tasks like creating alarms or notifications, turning on or turning off
the device, and et cetera. These objects are known as Smart Ob-
jects [2].
Smart Objects provide us with many possibilities and every day
we have more different Smart Objects. However, Smart Objects
can be more useful in the case of being interconnected with each
other and with other objects like sensors or actuators [2]. This in-
terconnection is called the Internet of Things (IoT). The Internet of
Things allows creating huge or small networks in order to obtain a
collective intelligence through the processing of objects＊ informa-
tion. The first example is how the IoT was born because the first
idea was its implementation in supply chains [3]. Other examples
are the object identification in chemistry plants, people, and ani-
mal using Smart Tags as Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) and
Near Field Communication (NFC) [4每6]. The IoT can be applied in
cities, also known as Smart Cities, in order to offer different ser-
vices that improve citizens＊ ＆livability＊ [7]. Smart Towns use a sim-
ilar application although they use the IoT to preserve their culture,
folks, and heritage in small cities and towns [8]. In other cases, we
can use the IoT to create Smart Homes that can control and au-
tomate certain things of our houses like doors, windows, fridges
[9每11], irrigation systems, lights, distribution multimedia [12], and
so on. By the contrary, some governments apply the IoT to con-
trol and care in the better way the Earth, which is also known as
Smart Earth [13], in front of different dangers like fire, earthquakes,
tsunamis, or floods. Moreover, we can use the IoT to anticipate and
prevent human disasters like the case of the Deepwater Horizon at
Gulf of Mexico [14] or the problem in the security system of the
Nuclear Central of Fukushima to detect the tsunami and automate
the turn off of the diesel motors or activate an protection over the
motors. Nonetheless, these systems need a central service to con-
trol and manage their data and their objects. Besides, sometimes
these systems need to create intelligence and take the decisions.
Thus, they need an IoT platform.
There are several IoT platforms for many and different uses:
business platforms, research platforms, platforms in beta state,
and open source platforms [15]. All these platforms are more
or less similar because they allow working with objects and
interconnecting them. Some platforms offer people an Application
Programming Interface (API) to facilitate this task.
A very interesting application for the IoT would be the recog-
nition of people using Computer Vision. Integrating Computer Vi-
sion in an IoT platform could offer more security systems to Smart
Cities, Smart Towns, Smart Homes, and Smart Earth because they
could recognise a person in the incorrect place at the wrong hour
because, maybe, he is a thief or a potentially dangerous person for
the environment like a pyromaniac. We could obtain this function-
ality without the need of a person to supervise the camera and fa-
cilitate this labour to revise only the critical pictures. We can see
a similar research in [16], where they use sensors to obtain data
and in the case of these data accomplish certain conditions then
the camera will take pictures. A similar idea was proposed in [8]
in order to protect the heritage of Smart Towns. Notwithstanding,
they did not apply Computer Vision because they only take a pic-
ture under certain conditions. After that, they need a person to see
that picture and evaluate the situation.
For these reasons our hypotheses were: Could we integrate
Computer Vision in the Internet of Things? Could we use the
pictures from an Internet Protocol (IP) Camera as a sensor? Could
we obtain a good accuracy to automate or semi-automate this kind
of events?
A possible solution for solving these hypotheses is the creation
of a Computer Vision module and the integration of this module
in an IoT platform. In our case, we used the Midgar IoT platform
[15,17]. We developed a Computer Vision module and modified
Midgar to support Computer Vision. To test our first one
hypothesis, we used an IP camera connected to the IoT platform
and we took different pictures to test the functionality. To test
the last both hypotheses, we took many pictures of the inside
of the laboratory. After, we tested all these pictures in a batch
process with our Computer Vision module to obtain the accuracy
that the module has. However, in order to improve the possible
detection of people, we analysed the entire sequence to find people
instead of analysing picture by picture in the way of improving the
identification of people by the use of all pictures of a movement.
In the rest of this article, we will discuss, in Section 2, about
what the Internet of Things and Smart Objects are, and explain

the different IoT applications like Smart Cities, Smart Towns, and
Smart Homes. Besides, we will explain a brief of Computer Vision,
we will continue talking about the current and more relevant IoT
platforms, and we will present the related work. In Section 3, we
will describe the case study, in our case, the Midgar IoT platform.
After, in Section 4, we will explain the methodology that we used
and show all the results of our evaluation and the discussion of the
results. To finalise this paper, we will present our conclusions in
Section 5 and show possible future work to do from this research
in Section 6.

2. State of the art

Nowadays, the Internet of Things is one of the most used
technologies with interest for some countries, like the United
States of America [18] and the United Nations [5]. Nevertheless, the
IoT needs many improvements because it was born a few years ago
and has many problems to resolve as we can see in different recent
articles about Smart Towns [8], protocols [19], security [20], or
others [5,12]. The goal is to use the IoT to interconnect everything,
from food to computers and then, automate different processes to
improve our daily life. Now, we have different Smart Objects with a
small but smart functionality in our life. Besides, we can use these
devices to make our life easier in some Smart Cities with special
services like Santander [21], for instance, to park or manage our
Smart Homes, or automate some tasks like the irrigation service.
However, sometimes this is very difficult. For example, if we have
a burglar alarm in our house and we have pets, we would have
a problem because, maybe, the alarm would sound due to the
animal whereas we only want that the alarm sound when the
alarm recognises a person. We propose a solution based on the use
of Computer Vision through the Midgar IoT Platform [15,17].

2.1. Internet of Things

The Internet of Things allows the interconnection of physical
and virtual things. These things can be objects of the physical
world or information of the virtual world. This interconnection
can be at any time, maybe meanwhile you are moving around
the world, in continuous motion, or at any time during the day,
in any place like outdoor or indoor, and between anything like
Human to Human (H2H), Machine to Machine (M2M), or between
Humans and Machines (H2M). [22]. The IoT allows creating a
Smart World, which is the fusion of heterogeneous and ubiquitous
objects, Smart Cities, Smart Towns [8], and Smart Homes [23], with
all devices capable of interacting between themselves [8]. The IoT
has originated the development of object automation through the
Internet to exchange information [24], allowing the creation of this
Smart World.
However, many heterogeneous things compose the IoT. The
most important are the Wireless Sensor Networks (WSN), which
are the core of the Internet of Things [25]. A WSN interconnects
sensors, in order to obtain data, with a server or special system to
work and maybe, automate tasks in one place. Other components
are actuators, which allow executing actions, like motors, fans,
machines, and so on. Another type of network is the fusion
between a WSN and the actuators, known as Wireless Sensor
and Actuator Network (WSAN). Besides, Smart Objects are other
important components because they can perform actions as
actuators, they can sense because usually they have sensors, and
they are smart to process information or data and perform actions.
Nevertheless, all these components need a connection with the
Internet, but currently, almost every objects can be connected to
the Internet [26].
This is why the definition of the IoT is the next: The Internet
of Things is the interconnection of heterogeneous and ubiquitous

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

303

objects between themselves through the Internet [5,6,15,17]. The
goal of the IoT is to interconnect the whole world through the
creation of different smart places to automate, improve, and
facilitate our daily life [17].

2.2. Smart Objects

A Smart Object or Intelligent Product is a physical object with
the capacity of interacting with the environment, in some cases
with intelligence to make decisions, with autonomous behaviour,
and identifiable in its whole useful life [2]. As we said before, Smart
Objects are one of the fundamental parts of the IoT. Some examples
of Smart Objects [2] are smartphones [27], Smart TVs [27], tablets,
some cars [27每29], IP cameras, computers, microcontrollers, some
freezer prototypes, and etcetera.
However, some objects, which are connected, have a limited
memory, CPU, or power [26]. For instance, an IP camera might not
have the necessary space or power computation to run applications
with the capabilities of applying Computer Vision to one or more
pictures. Thus, in these cases is needed other resources to obtain
the necessary computing. One option is to use an IoT server capable
of offering that intelligence through the network as occurs with
the IoT platform Midgar [17]. In this way, we can expand the
possibilities of objects like Smart Objects or Not-Smart Objects [2].
We can classify the Smart Objects according to the three

dimensions according to [2]: Level of Intelligence, Location of
the Intelligence, and Aggregation Level of Intelligence. In our

case, our IP camera is a Smart Object with a level of intelligence

of Notification of the Problem, with the Combined Intelligence,
and Intelligence in the Item.

2.3. Smart Cities, Smart Towns, and Smart Homes

Smart Cities are a very important part in the IoT [30]. A
Smart City has different types of sensors distributed around the
city to gather information about the city. Through the use of
ubiquitous communication networks, WSN, WSAN, and intelligent
systems, Smart Cities can offer new services to citizens [31], and
facilitate their daily life and improve the city ＆livability＊ [32]. We
can see some European Smart Cities like Luxemburg, Aberdeen,
Oviedo, and many other cities with their qualification in based
on different criterions in [33] or in [34], which define the Smart
City concept and analyse the Smart Cities of Europe in based on
six indicators. Another example is a big European project called
SmartSantander [21], which proposes an IoT architecture for Smart
Cities and shows the different services that this architecture can
offer.
Moreover, Smart Towns also exist. They are small cities or
towns with a great culture and heritage that need to preserve and
revitalise instead of only improving the ＆livability＊ as Smart Cities.
Smart Towns have to protect and expand their culture and heritage
to avoid the oblivion of their buildings, monuments, landscapes,
folklore, tradition, and a long etcetera. For instance, Smart Towns
can be capable of sharing their places, recording their culture and
the way of making their typical dishes, monitoring the conditions
in a specific place that needs special conditions like libraries or
museums, or protecting the monuments [8].
Smart Homes [35], also known as Intelligent Homes, are closer
to be a reality searching the ＆livability＊ in our homes. Smart Homes
provide us with an automated system to improve our daily life
at our homes. They are based on a WSAN that allows controlling
different objects at home performing certain events not only in
an automatically way but also invoked by remote controls or
smartphones. We can control the doors or the windows using our
smartphones or Smart Tags like RFID or NFC, create an automate

system lights, save money in the heater with different sensors and
an intelligent system [36], and so on.
Through this proposal, we want to improve the 4th and 5th
principles of the ＆livability＊ [7,8]. We want to improve the security
in these three IoT areas using Computer Vision for detecting
actions, people, or certain behaviours. By means of using an IP
camera, we are able to send pictures when we detect moving
objects, removed objects, abandoned objects, and manipulations of
the camera. After, we can apply Computer Vision to these pictures
in order to detect dangerous situation for important things like our
families or things in homes, monuments, heritage, specific people
in towns, and some type of citizens in cities.

2.4. Computer vision

Computers can only process zeros and ones. Nevertheless, years
ago, the Artificial Intelligent (AI) was born to offer the possibil-
ity of creating programmes that allow computers to learn. John
McCarthy coined this term in 1955 in the conference of Dart-
mouth [37]. Inside the AI, one of the fields is the Computer Vi-
sion. Computer Vision is the field that allows computers to ＆learn＊
to recognise a picture or the characteristics of a picture. This al-
lows identifying objects, humans, animals, or a position in a pic-
ture. Thus, the goal of the Computer Vision is that a machine can
understand the world [38].
For reaching this goal, there are many algorithms for the long
process of recognising something in a picture. Some algorithms
to obtain the features of the dataset that you can use to train
the model are Histogram of Oriented Gradients (HOG) [39], Local
Binary Patterns (LBP) [40每42], HOG每LBP [43], Scale-Invariant
Feature Transform (SIFT) [44], and Speeded-Up Robust Features
(SURF) [45]. Other algorithms are the necessaries to train the model
using the extracted features obtained previously. Some examples
of these algorithms are Support Vector Machine (SVM) [46] and
Logistic Regression [47,48]. However, the task of obtaining a good
model is very difficult. You need to take many good pictures and try
many times with another group of different pictures to check that
your model works well. Besides, you need to create a model to solve
your problem, because the use of general models could reduce the
accuracy. Examples of these models could be the sample models of
some applications like OpenCV. Even though, in this paper, we will
use this type of models.
In our proposal, we use Computer Vision to recognise the
presence of people in the pictures that the camera sends to the IoT
platform in order to perform an action in the positive cases. Thus,
we want to use the pictures as a special sensor.

2.5. Internet of Things platforms

As we explained before, to obtain the best potential of Smart
Objects, we need to interconnect them between themselves.
Notwithstanding, we need a ＆brain＊ which can manage and no-
tify the Smart Objects and sometimes, to work as the brain for
some other objects like actuators. This ＆brain＊ is an IoT platform.
For this purpose, there are different IoT platforms with different
pros and cons. We can classify these IoT platforms in the next four
groups [15]:
 Business platforms: Xively [49], Exosite [50], SensorCloud [51],
Etherios [52], ThingWorx [53], Carriots [54], Azure IoT Suit [55],
Amazon Web Services [56], and IBM Internet of Things [57].
 Research platforms: Midgar [17], Paraimpu [58], QuadraS-
 Platforms in beta state: Sensorpedia [63,64], Evrythng [65], and
pace [59], SenseWeb [60,61], and SIoT [62].
Open.Sen.se [66].

304

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

 Open Source platforms: ThingSpeak [67], Nimbits [68], and
Kaa [69].
Some of these IoT platforms have characteristics that others do not
have. However, none of them has a module of Computer Vision
that allows working with pictures as sensors. You can use an IP
camera as an actuator, namely, you can connect the IP camera and
take pictures under certain conditions. Our intention is to use the
IP cameras＊ pictures as sensors. For example, you could connect
the IP camera and send the pictures when a certain condition was
accomplished. Then, when the IoT platform received the pictures,
the IoT platform would have to analyse the picture for searching,
for example, people. In the case that the IoT platform detected
people, the IoT platform would trigger the action that the user had
defined for this case. For that, our proposal is one possible solution
to use the IP camera as a sensor using Computer Vision to detect a
specific thing in pictures.

2.6. Related work

In the current literature, there are some uses of cameras in
combination with IoT and sensors. In some cases, they use this
combination to improve the job conditions, obtain more data
without travelling to the place, or to obtain knowledge about
something.
One of those uses is to improve the care of bees and facilitate
the job of beekeepers [16]. They used a sound sensor to send a
picture when the sound exceeded some limit, and in this case, it
would send a message with that picture to the beekeeper. Then, the
beekeeper could decide if the hive needs his visit or not depending
on the things that he saw in the picture and the sensor information
obtained through a WSN. With this system, the keepers could
reduce the frequency of their visits to the moments that they
receive critical information, as demonstrated in [16] because they
can see information remotely. They analyse the sensor information
with an algorithm to avoid the human interaction for obtaining the
state of the beehive but, just the same, they have to see the picture
when they receive it to see what happen in the hive.
Another example is the proposal of using this combination
for learning. For instance, the IoT could help to learn and show
different knowledge between master and students by collecting
data and find the best way to train. With this way, they can help
to protect the heritage and folks of towns [8].
Other examples of Computer Vision is when it is used to create
maps or study maps, which is called Cartography [70]. A clearly
Cartography example are Google Maps or Bing Maps, which modify
the maps to give a service to people. In this way, Computer Vision
is applied to recognise some specific parts in maps, like roads,
buildings, water, or fields. This is an example of how to applied
Computer Vision in Smart Earth.
Another possibility is to use the Computer Vision as these
authors show in [71]. In this article, the authors propose the use
of Computer Vision to simulate the sight of humans combined it
with other sensors to simulate the five senses of the human body.
Exactly, their idea is to combine a camera, which allows identifying
things, with different sensors. This combination could calculate the
distance to the objects that the camera can see and interact in the
Internet of Things.
The previous proposals used the IoT with cameras. However,
they needed a person to see the picture in order to make a decision
in the first case or they record the movement to add more informa-
tion to the sensors in the second one case. In our proposal, we use
the camera to obtain the picture and then, we send the picture to a
Vision Computer module. This module is the responsible for taking
the decision and sending this decision to the IoT network, which is
the manager of the service. Then, we automate this step according
to a model in order to avoid the intermediary and accelerate the
response because maybe, in some cases, it is impossible for people
to see many pictures or take a decision immediately.

3. Case study: Midgar

Midgar is an Internet of Things platform to investigate different
solutions for the IoT [15,17]. In this paper, we try to find a solution
for the integration of Computer Vision in an IoT platform for
analysing pictures from IP cameras in order to find a determinate
object in the pictures and use the pictures of the IP camera as
sensors. In this section, we are going to describe the changes that
we did in the Midgar platform and show our proposed solution to
add the Computer Vision module in Midgar.

3.1. Midgar architecture

The system architecture is very similar to the original Midgar
architecture. It has the same four layers as we can see in Fig. 1:

Process Definition, Service Generation, Data Processor and

Object Manager, and Objects. However, we added the Computer
Vision module in the third layer and we had to modify the different
layers to support the new functionality.
The first layer is the Process Definition, which contains the
user＊s process. This is the only layer with user interaction. The
user (Fig. 1.1) must define the process that he needs through

Midgar Object Interconnection Specific Language (MOISL) that

was developed in [17] and we can see in Fig. 1.2. MOISL was
developed using the HTML5 canvas. When the user finished the
definition, and click the generate button, the editor generates
the Serialised Model (Fig. 1.3). Then, the editor serialises the
model that the user has defined using MOISL in an eXtensible
Markup Language (XML) file. This Serialised Model contains all the
necessary information about the model, which was created by the
user, and the information that the second layer needs to generate

the Active Process.
Afterwards, the Service Generation receives the Serialised

Model. This second layer parses and processes the information of
the Serialised Model in the Processor (Fig. 1.4), which creates,
compiles, and executes the Active Process that interconnects the
objects (Fig. 1.5).
The Active Process is placed in the third layer, Data Processor

and Object Manager. The Active Process keeps working in the

server while is performing the defined user＊s task. This process has
a continued and direct communication with the Midgar Store (Fig.
1.6), which is a part of the Midgar core because the Midgar Store
contains the database with the services, the objects, the actions,
and the data.
The last layer is the layer that contains the Objects. In this case,
our IP camera. These objects implement the message interface to
keep a permanent and bidirectional connection with the server
(Fig. 1.7). However, the IP camera cannot implement this message
service because the IP camera software is private. Nevertheless,
it can send pictures by HTTP protocol. Then, the IP camera has to
send the picture using the REpresentational State Transfer (REST)
of Midgar service. After, the Midgar service, which is in the third
layer, realises that this is a picture since Midgar analyses the
Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME) type of the request
and sends this request to the Computer Vision module (Fig. 1.7).
The Computer Vision module analyses the picture and responds
if the picture has or not a person.

3.2. Implementation

In this subsection, we are going to explain the new implemen-
tation of Midgar. Firstly, we are going to explain the flow through
the different layers. Afterwards, we are going to describe the func-
tionality and the interconnection of our Computer Vision module
in Midgar. Lastly, we are going to talk about the functionality that
the IP camera offers.

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

305

respond to Midgar with a ＆True＊, in another case, with a ＆False＊.
Then, Midgar will store this response in the database, as if it were
a sensor with only these two possible states.

3.2.2. Computer vision module
We chose as a possible solution the creation of a separate
module. In this way, we could call this module when we need
to evaluate a picture or a picture sequence. The decision was to
separate the implementation of the Computer Vision module from
the IoT platform. This allows us to execute different tests with the
same module and the same architecture for the evaluation of this
proposal and then, we only have to change the parameters that we
use to call the Computer Vision module.
The Computer Vision module was developed in Python due
to the requirements of the Open CV library that performs the
body detection work. The use of Open CV also required the use
of the library Numpy. The workflow of this module consists of
loading an image from a file, converting the image to a bytes array,
transforming the image to grey scale, and using the Open CV library
to detect the number of bodies in the image. If there is anybody, the
module will return the Boolean value ＆True＊ else, the module will
return the Boolean value ＆False＊. However, we chose to improve the
module recognition by using of picture sequences instead only one
picture. In this way, we could obtain more accuracy because our
objective is the detection of a dangerous movement.
However, OpenCV needs to setup a few variables. The first one
is to indicate the scale factor. The scale factor is necessary to create
the scale pyramid that the algorithm uses to find objects in dif-
ferent depth inside the picture, which we set this value to ＆1.01＊.
The second variable is the minimum near detections that are re-
quired to compose a single object. We set up this second one with
the value ＆10＊. The last parameter is the minimum size of each de-
tection window that we set up to ＆(200, 200)＊. Nevertheless, the val-
ues that we used to set up the OpenCV library depend on the con-
text. Furthermore, an external XML file is required because OpenCV
loads the classifier from an external file in order to reuse the same
code with different classifiers. In our proposal, we decided to use
three sample classifiers that allow OpenCV to detect upper bod-
ies, frontal faces, and the combination of heads and shoulders. If
we wanted to detect other things, we would create new classifiers
extracting the needed features. Furthermore, these models are ex-
amples and they are a bit weak. For this reason, if we want a better
recognition, we should train a new model to obtain a better and
more specific classifier. However, we could improve in any way the
movement detection in the case that we analyse the sequence to
obtain at least one picture, which means that it is a positive detec-
tion. For instance, in the case that we would have a better classifier,
we could increase this number and require at least three or five pic-
tures with the object that we want to recognise. It is very useful if,
for instance, we want to use this system to detect dangerous peo-
ple like burglars, thieves, and so on in our home, or people in some
private or dangerous area. In these cases, it is preferred that the
module gives false negatives instead false positives cases. The rea-
son is because if we received a false negative, we only received a
false alarm. On the contrary, if we obtain a false negative, we could
have a thief in our home.
In order to test the body detection, another module was devel-
oped that skips Midgar. This module, also developed in Python,
uses the library Flask to receive the images from the camera and
follows the workflow of the other module although it does not re-
turn a Boolean value. This module saves the images that the camera
sends in a directory and saves another image if the module detects
a body, drawing a green rectangle around the body in the image.
With this information, we will be able to do the evaluation of our
proposal.

Fig. 1. Midgar platform architecture with the computer vision module.

Fig. 2. Midgar flow.

3.2.1. Midgar flow
In order to add the capacity of Computer Vision to Midgar, we
had to create a module with this capacity. The rest of Midgar is
equal to the previous platform [17]. Then, the difference is when
Midgar receives a picture. When this happens, Midgar detects that
the request contains a picture because Midgar is able to analyse
the MIME type of the request. For instance, when an object like an
Arduino or other, which has the possibility to deploy applications,
is connected to Midgar, this object can send a message using the
XML standard style of Midgar. In this case, the Canon IP camera
does not allow modifying the software, as occur with others IP
cameras, but we can analyse the MIME type to see if it is a picture as
we can see in Fig. 2. Then, when Midgar receives a picture, Midgar
saves the picture in a folder. When Midgar spends five seconds
waiting for pictures and more pictures have arrived, Midgar sends
the picture sequence to the Computer Vision module. After that,
the Computer Vision module analyses the folder, which contains
the whole picture sequence, to find people in at least, one picture.
In the case that the module finds one or more people, it will

306

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

Fig. 3. Canon IP camera with the ＆Moving Object Detection＊ selected mode.

3.2.3. Canon IP camera
We used the Canon VB-S30D as IP camera but before, we had
updated the firmware to the last version, the 1.2 of May 26th of
2015. We connected the camera through Ethernet connection. This
camera is a Smart Object because it recognises its own data and it
can make decisions according to the video. This IP camera allows
doing streaming using a URL or send pictures or emails when the
IP camera detects some changes in the video. For instance, if it
recognises some movement or the modification of some object in
the scene, and it can send pictures or emails with the pictures of
that moment.
In Fig. 3 we can see the five detection types that the camera
offers. The first one is the ＆moving object detection＊ and this
consists of detecting some movement. Secondly, the ＆abandoned
object detection＊ which consists in notifying the presence of new
objects. Another is the ＆removed object detection＊ which detects
when any object disappears from the default scene. The fourth is
the ＆camera tampering detection＊ which consists in detecting when
the camera was manipulated. The last one is the ＆step detection＊
which detects a movement over a defined line. These five events
are configurable and allow us to receive pictures or emails only
when the scene was changed.
Besides, we can choose two modes in the camera. We can
analyse the streaming or analyse the pictures that we received. For
working with the camera in Midgar, firstly, we had to modify the IP
camera configuration by setting the IP and port of the Midgar REST
service, where the camera had to send the picture. Afterwards, we
had to register the IP camera in the platform so that the camera
could be selected in MOISL. Then, we could select the camera in
MOISL, create the interconnection, and work with the camera.

3.3. Used software and hardware

We used the next software to develop this research work:
 Midgar:
 The Midgar server is based on Ruby 2.3.1p112 and it uses the
Rails framework 4.2.6.

 Thin web server 1.6.4
 MySQL Database 5.5.53
 The graphic DSL, MOISL, was developed by using the element
HTML5 canvas and JavaScript.
 The application generator module was developed using Java
8.
 Computer Vision module:
 The computer vision module was developed using Python
 The library OpenCV 3.1.0 to apply Computer Vision to the
3.5.2
 Numpy 1.11.3 because it is a requirement of OpenCV
pictures
 Flask 0.11.1 to develop a mini-server to the test
 Models:
(cid:4) Frontal face: ＆haarcascade_frontalface_alt_tree.xml＊ [72]
(cid:4) Head and shoulders: ＆haarcascade_head_and_shoulders.
xml＊ [73]
(cid:4) Human body, Pedestrian Detection (22 ℅ 18 upper body)
＆haarcascade_upperbody.xml＊ [72]
 Camera IP:
 Canon VB-S30D with firmware v.1.2.0
 Internet Explorer 11 to access to the camera configuration
For the evaluation of the proposal, we used the next hardware
components:
 One Raspberry Pi 2 Model B as a dedicated server with Raspbian
4.4.38-v7+
 Three Android smartphones: A Nexus 4 running version 5.1.1, a
Motorola with version 2.2.2, and a Samsung Galaxy Mini S5570
with version 2.3.6.
 One Arduino Uno microcontroller board based on the AT-
mega328.
 During the various tests, we used as actuators: a speaker, a
servo-motor, a DC motor, and several LEDs.

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

307

Fig. 4. Canon camera IP situation in the laboratory with the background that we used to take the pictures.

4. Evaluation and discussion

In this section, we describe with all detail the methodology that
we did to evaluate our hypotheses. After that, we show the results
that we obtained in our evaluation. We have divided the evaluation
into two phases: manual pictures and automatic pictures. More-
over, we have compared the results of three different models in
order to conclude what model was better for our proposal. We are
going to explain each subsection through these two phases.

4.1. Methodology

The main objective of this evaluation process is to verify our
hypotheses:
 Could we insert the use of Computer Vision in the Internet of
 Could we use the pictures from an IP camera as a sensor?
Things?
 Could we obtain a good accuracy to automate or semi-automate
this kind of events?
We have demonstrated the possibility of the use of Computer
Vision in the Internet of Things in the previous section, in the
Implementation. Then, we have demonstrated our first hypothesis.
Now, we are going to explain how to try to validate if our second
hypothesis is possible. For validating the second hypothesis, we
used two different phases but both with the same objective:
to evaluate the accuracy of the Computer Vision module using
pictures to detect people. In both phases, we used pictures without
people and pictures with people and three different models. Then,
we used the pictures without people to detect the false positives
and true negatives cases for each model. With the pictures with
people, we also obtained the false negatives and true positives
cases for each model. For these both phases, we used the module
without the Midgar interaction because we need to obtain the
picture with the green rectangle to evaluate in a quantitative way
if our module works well. Our two phases are the following:
 Phase 1 - Manual pictures: in this first one phase, we used
pictures that we took with the Canon IP camera inside our
laboratory manually. In this phase, we tested the Computer

Vision module with isolated pictures without any relationship
with the rest of pictures.

 Phase 2 - Automatic pictures: in the second phase, we used

the picture sequences that the camera sent us when the camera
detected some movement in the laboratory with its sensors.
In this case, the pictures of the sequence to evaluate have a
relation between themselves because the pictures belong to the
same movement. With this case, we wanted to try the Computer
Vision module with a picture sequence to improve the detection
algorithm using the relationship of the pictures of one same
moment.
For these both phases, we used the three different models in order
to compare the different results and conclude with is the best
model to use to our proposal. These models can detect the upper
body of people, the frontal faces, and the combination of heads
and shoulders. They have low accuracy because they are general
models and need pictures with people in the correct position. If we
needed a better accuracy, we should create our own specialised
model. For taking the pictures that we used in this evaluation, we
placed the IP camera in the middle of our laboratory in a position
to watch the entrance door as we show in Fig. 4.

4.1.1. Phase 1: Manual pictures
For this first phase, we used the manual mode of the IP camera.
We divided the pictures into two folders according to pictures
without people and pictures with people. We analysed each folder
with our module. For each folder, we obtained a new folder with
the detected person inside a green rectangle. After it, we reviewed
manually each picture taking into consideration the expected
result because, maybe, the green rectangle could mark an incorrect
thing like a wardrobe or a signal instead of a person. In that case,
we count the picture as wrong.
For this phase, we took 160 pictures manually: 64 with people
and 96 without people. In Fig. 5, we show an example with
three pictures: two with a person and another without people.
Afterwards, we process these pictures with our Computer Vision
module to detect the accuracy of our module using the three
different models. With this test, we tried to evaluate the accuracy
of each model that we use in our Computer Vision module.

308

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

Fig. 5. Example with indoor pictures which took manually.

Fig. 6. Example of one of the picture sequences that the Canon IP camera send when detects movement.

4.1.2. Phase 2: Automatic pictures
In the second phase, we programmed the camera to send a
picture when the camera detected any movement in the area. In
this case, the camera sent picture sequence from the first moment
that the camera detects the movement until the last detection
of the same movement. Then, we analysed all the sequence with
each model to obtain if this method is valid to use the Computer
Vision with an IP camera as a sensor. In Fig. 6, we show some
pictures of this sequences about how the camera detected the
initial movement in the first picture and after, it continued sending
one picture per second until the movement ceased. The camera
is capable of sending from one picture per second to thirty
pictures per second. However, to do the evaluation, we selected
the maximum value in the camera configuration.
The number of pictures depends on the movement time. The
camera sent each picture to another web service created in Python
with Flask to avoid the interaction of Midgar. The reason is that
in this way we test only our Computer Vision module without a
possible interference of the Midgar IoT platform. In this case, we
intended to evaluate if we could obtain an improvement of the sys-
tem using the camera sensor or maintain the same level. Besides,
this way allows us a reduction of the network traffic, a reduction of
the necessary process computer, and avoid using the streaming op-
tion. For this phase, we used 972 pictures divided into 17 sequences
from which 8 sequences, which were composed by 817 pictures,
were movements where appeared people and 9 sequences, which
were composed by 155 pictures, were movements where did not
appear people. Clarify, the sequences had many pictures without
people because they have only a half body or an arm. Then, these
sequences contained many invalidated pictures but these pictures
were part of the sequence. For the negative sequences, we used
the movement of different objects in front of the camera like balls,
mugs, or papers.

4.2. Results

In this section, we are going to describe the results. In order to
improve the understandability, we design tables and graphs that

represent the results of testing the pictures with our Computer
Vision module with each model and the results of the module
classified in the different four groups:
 True Negative: pictures without people with a negative result.
This is the best result for pictures without people because
it means that the module does not detect people in pictures
 False Positive: pictures without people with a positive result.
without people.
This is the wrong case when we search people in pictures
without people because this is when the module says that it
found people.
 False Negative: pictures with people with a negative result.
This is the worst result because is when the module analyses
pictures with people but the module did not detect people in
that picture.
 True Positive: pictures with people with a positive result. This is
the best result when the module analyses pictures with people
because this result appears when the module found people.
Next, in phase 1, we are going to describe the result with manual
pictures. After that, we are going to show the second subsection,
which contains the phase 2 with the result of using the camera
sensor and analyse sequences of pictures instead of an isolated
picture.

4.2.1. Phase 1: Manual pictures
Table 1 and Fig. 7 show the result of the evaluation of the
160 manual pictures. These were divided into 96 pictures without
people and 64 pictures with people, thus, the system can obtain a
maximum of 96 true negatives or 96 false positives, and 64 true
positives or 64 false negatives.
By analysing Table 1 and Fig. 7, we can suggest the following
interpretations:
 After analysing the 96 pictures without people, the Computer
Vision module interpreted 95 of these pictures as negative using
the model for upper bodies detection. This represents a success

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

309

Table 1

Results of the evaluation of the manual pictures.
Model
True positive (64)
False positive (96)
Upper body
7/10.94%
1/1.04%
Head and shoulders
22/34.38%
0/0.00%
Frontal face
0/0.00%
1/1.04%

True negative (96)
95/98.96%
96/100.00%
95/98.96%

False negative (64)
57/89.06%
42/65.63%
64/100.00%

Fig. 7. Results of the evaluation of the manual pictures.

Fig. 8. Three pictures of the true positive cases.

of 98.96% of the total. Using the model for heads and shoulders
detection, the Computer Vision module interpreted 96 pictures
as negative which represents a success of 100.00%. Using the
model for frontal faces detection, the Computer Vision module
interpreted 95 pictures as negative that represents a success
of 98.96%. The used model for detecting heads and shoulders
obtained the best accuracy for the negative cases because had
the highest success in the true negative cases whereas the
model for detecting frontal faces obtained the worst accuracy
 After analysing the 64 pictures with people, the Computer Vi-
for these cases.
sion module interpreted 7 of these pictures as positive using
the model for upper bodies detection which represents a suc-
cess of 10.94% of the total. In Fig. 8, we show three of the seven
pictures that the Computer Vision module detected as true posi-
tive cases. Using the model for heads and shoulders detection, it
interpreted 22 pictures as positive, which represents a success
of 34.38%. Using the model for frontal faces detection, the Com-
puter Vision module interpreted 0 pictures as positive which
represents a success of 0.00%. The model for detecting frontal
faces obtained the worst accuracy for the positive cases be-
cause the module did not detect people in pictures with people
whereas the model for detecting heads and shoulders obtained
the best accuracy for these cases although it is a very high un-
successful result. Moreover, in some cases, the module inter-

preted as positive pictures with people but it detected other
things instead of the people. These failures were interpreted as
negative cases. We show two cases of this type in Fig. 9.
 The best accuracy for detecting people in manual pictures was
obtained by the model for detecting heads and shoulders be-
cause this model allowed to the Computer Vision module inter-
prets as positive cases the highest number of positive pictures
and the module interpreted as negative cases the highest num-
ber of negative pictures. Thus, the best model to use with man-
ual pictures is the model for heads and shoulders. However, the
accuracy for positive cases is too low to be able to demonstrate
that pictures can be used as sensors.

4.2.2. Phase 2: Automatic pictures
In this second phase, we analysed the pictures of the 17
sequences. We used 9 sequences without people and 8 with people.
Thus, the system can obtain a maximum of 9 true negatives or 9
false positives, and 8 true positives or 8 false negatives. In this case,
we analysed all the sequence as one item instead of analysing each
picture separately. We can see some of the detected pictures in
Fig. 10.
In Table 2 and Fig. 11, we show the results of applying our
Computer Vision module to the picture sequences.
We can suggest the next interpretations analysing the Table 2
and Fig. 11:

310

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

Fig. 9. The two pictures that we discarded because the wrong detection.

Fig. 10. Collage with pictures of the true positive sequences.

Fig. 11. Results of the Computer Vision module analysing the sequences.

Table 2

Results of the Computer Vision module analysing the sequences.
Model
True positive (8)
False positive (9)
Upper body
8/100.00%
0/0.00%
Head and shoulders
7/87.50%
0/0.00%
Frontal face
3/37.50%
1/11.11%

True negative (9)
9/100.00%
9/100.00%
8/88.89%

False negative (8)
0/0.00%
1/12.50%
5/62.50%

 After analysing the 9 sequences without people, the Computer
Vision module interpreted the 9 sequences as negative using
the model for upper bodies detection which represents a
success of 100.00%. Using the model for heads and shoulders
detection, the module also interpreted the 9 sequences as
negative therefore it also achieved a success of 100.00%. Using
the model for frontal faces detection, the module interpreted
8 sequences as negative which represents a success of 88.89%.
The models for detecting upper bodies and heads and shoulders
obtained both the best possible accuracy for the negative cases

whereas the model for detecting frontal faces obtained the
 After analysing the 8 sequences with people, the Computer
worst accuracy for these cases although it is not a bad accuracy.
Vision module interpreted the 8 sequences as positive using the
model for upper bodies detection which represents a success of
100.00%. Using the model for heads and shoulders detection,
it interpreted 7 sequences as positive which represents a
success of 87.50%. Using the model for frontal faces detection, it
interpreted 3 sequences as positive which represents a success
of 37.50%. As it happened with manual pictures, the model

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

311

Table 3

Information about the sequences.
Sequence
Sequence
Total
name
with
pictures
people?

Upper body

Head and shoulders

Frontal face

Identified
pictures
5

Detection
%
6.41%

Result

Identified
pictures
0

Detection
%
0.00%

Result

Identified
pictures
0

Detection
%
0.00%

Result

C1

Yes

78

True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
False
positive

False
negative
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
positive
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative
True
negative

False negative

C2

Yes

229

5

2.18%

9

3.93%

1

0.44%

True positive

D1

Yes

53

17

32.08%

6

11.32%

0

0.00%

False negative

D2

Yes

49

9

18.37%

8

16.33%

2

4.08%

True positive

D3

Yes

54

19

35.19%

10

18.52%

0

0.00%

False negative

D4

Yes

207

2

0.97%

4

1.93%

2

0.97%

True positive

L1

Yes

84

13

15.48%

5

5.95%

0

0.00%

False negative

L2

Yes

63

4

6.35%

4

6.35%

0

0.00%

False negative

C

No

12

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

F

No

35

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

M

No

9

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

P

No

7

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

P1

No

7

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

P2

No

25

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

P3

No

17

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

SP

No

30

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

1

3.33%

False positive

T

No

20

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

0

0.00%

True negative

for detecting frontal faces obtained the worst accuracy for
the positive cases. However, the model that obtained the best
 The Computer Vision module with the model for detecting
accuracy is the model for detecting upper bodies.
upper bodies and our configuration obtained nine true positive
cases for the nine positive sequences. It means the 100% of
accuracy. This demonstrates that the use of picture sequences
improves the accuracy in comparison with single pictures and
the use of IP cameras as sensors is possible.
Table 3 shows the information about each sequence: name, if it
contains people or not, the total pictures that the camera sent when
detects the movement, which are the pictures that compose that
sequence, the number and the percent of pictures that our module
checked as picture with people, and the results according to our
module for each model.
According to Table 3, we can suggest the next interpretation:
 The detection percent does not have relation with the number
of pictures: ＆C2＊ has 229 picture and it only obtained percent-
ages below 5% of identified pictures. Meanwhile, ＆D3＊, with 54
pictures, obtained a 35.19% with the model for detecting up-
per bodies. It depends on the pictures quality: people＊s posi-
tion, picture sharpness, or full body shots because many pic-
tures only contain the arm or a half body.

5. Conclusions

In this paper, we have presented a possible solution to use
Computer Vision in the Internet of Things. This could allow using IP
cameras and pictures as sensors. Besides, this could open the door

to other similar applications like automating things using Optical
Character Recognition (OCR), face detection, or gestures.
In this way, we have presented a possible architecture to
integrate Computer Vision in an IoT platform, in our case Midgar.
This Computer Vision module, analyses the picture, or, in our
case, picture sequences, and returns to the IoT platform a Boolean
result as if it was a button sensor. However, we have shown
that if you have a weak model, the Computer Vision module
could have a low accuracy. To deduce this, we tested our module
using three different models for detecting upper bodies, heads
and shoulders, and frontal faces. After evaluating our module with
the three models, we obtained that the model for detecting head
and shoulders is the best in the first phase, in which we analysed
isolated pictures, with an accuracy of 100.00% for True Negatives
but a 34.38% of accuracy for True Positives. Nevertheless, we
proposed to analyse whole sequences of pictures, and we obtained
much better results: the model for detecting upper bodies achieved

an accuracy of 100% for True Positives and 100.00% for True

Negatives. This was possible because we centred our module in
the analysis of all the sequence of movement. Thus, the best model
to analyse sequences is the model for detecting upper bodies.
Moreover, we saw that the number of picture sequences does
not affect the result because some cases with many pictures have
the less detection percent. In the case of ＆C2＊ with 229 picture,
our module only obtained percentages below 5% of identified
pictures. The contrary case was ＆D3＊ with 54 pictures because our
module obtained a 35.19% of accuracy with the model for detecting
upper bodies. In this case, the important thing is the quality of the
pictures. This is why, it is probably better to analyse sequences
instead of isolated pictures, which is the thing that we do.
According to this article, we can say that it is possible the use
of Computer Vision in the IoT. Besides, with a very interesting

312

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

application. In addition, we have shown that we can use pictures as
sensors using not a perfect or weak model because if we analyse all
the sequence that we need, we can improve the results. However,
it is better and more recommendable the use of a good model with
the sequences because we could improve the accuracy.
Automating is one of the ways of the Internet of Things. In this
way, if we could improve and add new functionalities with Com-
puter Vision, we could facilitate the use of the Internet of Things
in our daily life and we could create new ways to communicate
us with our environment. In this case, we can use our research to
automate and improve the security of our homes, towns, cities, in-
dustries, and the Earth.

6. Future work

This proposal is a possible solution for some of the current prob-
lems of the IoT. There are many ways to continue this research and
we are going to propose some of them in the next enumeration:

 Creating a Domain-Specific Language using Model-Driven
Engineering to facilitate the Computer Vision:

In our
proposal, we offered the possibility to detect only people in the
pictures because you need to extract the features and train the
model to detect other things. This is why offering a Domain-
Specific Language to facilitate these steps in an IoT platform is
one possibility.

 Creating a system to control and define the different IP

camera actions: In this proposal, we used the IP camera as a
sensor. In other proposals, the authors used the camera like an
actuator, but only to take pictures. One possible way would be
to develop an API to allow the total camera control like move it,
 IoT platforms scalability: The Computer Vision needs many
change its properties, and so on.
computer resources. Then,
in the case that the computer
received many pictures or has many IP cameras, the computer
would need more time to process the whole information. This
is why another future work way could be the study and test
of different implementations in the IoT platforms to obtain a
correct way of supporting the maximum number of IP cameras,
or how to discard many repeated pictures.

 Optical character recognition or face detection: Another field

in Computer Vision is the character detection and the face
detection. We could automate our doors to open it when it
detects a determinate identification badge, license plate, or face.
However, this is why we should check different secure options
because the Computer Vision is a very problematic field due to
 Gesture recognition: In this proposal, we analysed a sequence
the security that it needs.
to detect people. Another possibility is to analyse the sequence
to detect a determinate gesture to trigger an action. Then, we
could use a picture sequence to detect a determinate gesture,
which could throw a determinate action, previously assigned.
It would allow using the pictures as sensors with different out-
puts.

Acknowledgements

This work was performed by the ＆Ingenier赤a Dirigida por
Modelos MDERG＊ research group at the University of Oviedo
under Contract No. FC-15-GRUPIN14-084 of the research project
＆Ingenier赤a Dirigida Por Modelos MDERG＊. Project financed by PR
Proyecto Plan Regional.

References

[1] Fundaci車n Telef車nica, La Sociedad de la Informaci車n en Espaa 2014,
2015.
http://www.fundaciontelefonica.com/arte_cultura/publicaciones-
listado/pagina-item-publicaciones/?itempubli=323.

[2] C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, D. Meana-Llori芍n, B.C.P. G-Bustelo, J.M.C. Lovelle, A review
about smart objects, sensors, and actuators, Int. J. Interact. Multimed. Artif.
Intell. 4 (2017) 7每10. http://dx.doi.org/10.9781/ijimai.2017.431.
[3] K. Ashton, That ＆＆Internet of things＊＊ thing, RFiD J. 22 (2009) 97每114.
http://www.itrco.jp/libraries/RFIDjournal- That%20Internet%20of%20Things%
20Thing.pdf.
[4] G. Kortuem, F. Kawsar, D. Fitton, V. Sundramoorthy, Smart objects as building
blocks for the Internet of things, IEEE Internet Comput. 14 (2010) 44每51.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MIC.2009.143.
[5] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, The Internet of things: A survey, Comput. Netw.
54 (2010) 2787每2805. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010.
[6] K. Gama, L. Touseau, D. Donsez, Combining heterogeneous service technolo-
gies for building an Internet of things middleware, Comput. Commun. 35
(2012) 405每417. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comcom.2011.11.003.
[7] US Department of Transportation, Livability, 2015.
http://www.transportation.gov/livability/101 (accessed 11.02.16).
[8] A.J. Jara, Y. Sun, H. Song, R. Bie, D. Genooud, Y. Bocchi, Internet of things for
cultural heritage of smart cities and smart regions, in: 2015 IEEE 29th Int. Conf.
Adv. Inf. Netw. Appl. Work, IEEE, Gwangiu, 2015, pp. 668每675. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1109/WAINA.2015.169.
[9] H. Gu, D. Wang, A content-aware fridge based on RFID in smart home for home-
healthcare, in: Adv. Commun. Technol. 2009. ICACT 2009. 11th Int. Conf.,
Phoenix Park, 2009, pp. 987每990.
[10] S. Luo, H. Xia, Y. Gao, J.S. Jin, R. Athauda, Smart fridges with multimedia
capability for better nutrition and health, in: 2008 Int. Symp. Ubiquitous
Multimed. Comput, IEEE, Hobart, ACT, 2008, pp. 39每44. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/UMC.2008.17.
[11] M. Rothensee, A high-fidelity simulation of the smart fridge enabling product-
based services, in: 3rd IET Int. Conf. Intell. Environ, (IE 07), IEE, 2007,
pp. 529每532. http://dx.doi.org/10.1049/cp:20070420.
[12] E. Borgia, The Internet of things vision: Key features, applications and
open issues, Comput. Commun. 54 (2014) 1每31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.
comcom.2014.09.008.
[13] C. Hao, X. Lei, Z. Yan, The application and implementation research of smart
city in China, in: Syst. Sci. Eng. ICSSE, 2012 Int. Conf., Dalian, Liaoning, 2012,
pp. 288每292. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICSSE.2012.6257192.
[14] A. Broring, P. Maue, C. Malewski, K. Janowicz, Semantic mediation on the
Sensor Web, in: 2012, pp. 2910每2913.
[15] C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, J.P. Espada, E.R.N. Valdez, V. Garc赤a-D赤az, Midgar: Domain-
specific language to generate smart objects for an Internet of things platform,
in: 2014 Eighth Int. Conf. Innov. Mob. Internet Serv. Ubiquitous Comput, IEEE,
Birmingham, United Kingdom, 2014, pp. 352每357. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
IMIS.2014.48.
[16] F.E. Murphy, M. Magno, L. O＊Leary, K. Troy, P. Whelan, E.M. Popovici, Big
brother for bees (3B) - Energy neutral platform for remote monitoring of bee-
hive imagery and sound, in: 2015 6th Int. Work. Adv. Sensors Interfaces, IEEE,
Gallipoli, 2015, pp. 106每111. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IWASI.2015.7184943.
[17] C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, C.P. Garc赤a-Bustelo, J.P. Espada, G. Cueva-Fernandez,
Midgar, Generation of heterogeneous objects interconnecting applications. A
domain specific language proposal for Internet of things scenarios, Comput.
Networks. 64 (2014) 143每158. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.comnet.2014.02.
010.
[18] The US National Intelligence Council, Six Technologies with Potential Impacts
on US Interests out to 2025, 2008.
[19] K.T. Nguyen, M. Laurent, N. Oualha, Survey on secure communication protocols
for the Internet of things, Ad Hoc Networks (2015) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.adhoc.2015.01.006.
[20] T. Polk, S. Turner, Security challenges for the Internet of things, in: Work.
Interconnecting Smart Objects with Internet, Prague, 2011. https://www.iab.
org/wp- content/IAB- uploads/2011/03/Turner.pdf.
[21] L. Sanchez, L. Muoz, J.A. Galache, P. Sotres, J.R. Santana, V. Gutierrez, et al.,
SmartSantander: IoT experimentation over a smart city testbed, Comput.
Netw. 61 (2014) 217每238. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bjp.2013.12.020.
[22] International Telecommunication Union, Overview of the Internet of things,
2012, 14. https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Y.2060-201206-I.
[23] J.A. Stankovic, Research directions for the Internet of things, IEEE Internet
Things J. 1 (2014) 3每9. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2014.2312291.
[24] M. Benalla, B. Achchab, H. Hrimech, A distributed intelligent system for
emergency convoy, Int. J. Interact. Multimed. Artif. Intell. 4 (2016) 42.
http://dx.doi.org/10.9781/ijimai.2016.418.
[25] M. Delamo, S. Felici-Castell, J.J. P谷rez-Solano, A. Foster, Designing an open
source maintenance-free environmental monitoring application for wireless
sensor networks, J. Syst. Softw. 103 (2015) 238每247. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1016/j.jss.2015.02.013.
[26] P. Martinez-Julia, E.T. Garcia, J.O. Murillo, A.F. Skarmeta, Evaluating video
streaming in network architectures for the Internet of things, in: 2013 Seventh
Int. Conf. Innov. Mob. Internet Serv. Ubiquitous Comput., IEEE, Taiwan, 2013,
pp. 411每415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IMIS.2013.76.
[27] J.
Iglesias Feijoo, G. Amat Gomariz, New challenges on crossplatform
digital contents,
Int.
J.
Interact. Multimed. Artif.
Intell. 3 (2015) 26.
http://dx.doi.org/10.9781/ijimai.2015.323.
[28] G. Cueva-Fernandez, J.P. Espada, V. Garc赤a-D赤az, C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, N. Garcia-
Fernandez, Vitruvius: An expert system for vehicle sensor tracking and
managing application generation, J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 42 (2014) 178每188.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jnca.2014.02.013.

C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a et al. / Future Generation Computer Systems 76 (2017) 301每313

313

[29] G. Cueva-Fernandez,
J. Pascual Espada, V. Garc赤a-D赤az, R. Gonzalez-
Crespo, Fuzzy decision method to improve the information exchange
in a vehicle sensor tracking system, Appl. Soft Comput. 35 (2015) 1每9.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2015.01.066.
[30] A. Zanella, N. Bui, A. Castellani, L. Vangelista, M. Zorzi, Internet of things for
smart cities, IEEE Internet Things J. 1 (2014) 22每32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/
JIOT.2014.2306328.
[31] R. Jesner Clarke, Smart Cities and the Internet of Everything: The Foundation
for Delivering Next-Generation Citizen Services, 2013, pp. 1每18. http://www.
cisco.com/web/strategy/docs/scc/ioe_citizen_svcs_white_paper_idc_2013.
pdf.
[32] S. Mitchell, N. Villa, M. Stewart-Weeks, A. Lange, The Internet of everything
for cities: Connecting people, process, data, and things to improve the
＆＆livability＊＊ of cities and communities, 2013, pp. 1每21. http://www.cisco.com/
web/strategy/docs/gov/everything- for- cities.pdf.
[33] Vienna University of Technology, European Smart Cities, 2015.
http://www.smart-cities.eu (accessed 28.09.16).
[34] A. Caragliu, C. Del Bo, P. Nijkamp, Smart cities in Europe, J. Urban Technol. 18
(2011) 65每82. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10630732.2011.601117.
[35] K.A. Hribernik, Z. Ghrairi, C. Hans, K. Thoben, Co-creating the Internet of things
- first experiences in the participatory design of intelligent products with
Arduino, in: Concurr. Enterprising, ICE, 2011 17th Int. Conf., Aachen, 2011,
pp. 1每9.
[36] D. Meana-Llori芍n, C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, B.C.P. G-Bustelo, J.M. Cueva Lovelle,
N. Garcia-Fernandez, IoFClime: The fuzzy logic and the Internet of things to
control indoor temperature regarding the outdoor ambient conditions, Future
Gener. Comput. Syst. (2016) http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2016.11.020.
[37] J. McCarthy, M.L. Minsky, N. Rochester, C.E. Shannon, A proposal for the
dartmouth summer research project on artificial intelligence, AI Mag. 27
(2006) 12每14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1609/aimag.v27i4.1904.
[38] C. Wang, N. Komodakis, N. Paragios, Markov random field modeling, inference
& learning in computer vision & image understanding: A survey, Comput. Vis.
Image Underst. 117 (2013) 1610每1627. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2013.
07.004.
[39] N. Dalal, B. Triggs, Histograms of oriented gradients for human detection,
in: 2005 IEEE Comput. Soc. Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit., IEEE, San
Diego, CA, USA, 2005, pp. 886每893. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2005.177.
[40] Dong-Chen He, Li Wang, Texture unit, texture spectrum and texture analysis,
in: 12th Can. Symp. Remote Sens. Geosci. Remote Sens. Symp., IEEE, 1989,
pp. 2769每2772. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS.1989.575836.
[41] Dong-chen He, Li Wang, Texture unit, texture spectrum, and texture analysis,
IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens. 28 (1990) 509每512. http://dx.doi.org/10.
1109/TGRS.1990.572934.
[42] L. Wang, D.-C. He, Texture classification using texture spectrum, Pat-
tern Recognit. 23 (1990) 905每910. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0031- 3203(90)
90135- 8.
[43] X. Wang, T.X. Han, S. Yan, An HOG-LBP human detector with partial occlusion
handling, in: 2009 IEEE 12th Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., IEEE, Kyoto, 2009,
pp. 32每39. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2009.5459207.
[44] D.G. Lowe, Object recognition from local scale-invariant features, in: Proc.
Seventh IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., Vol. 2, IEEE, 1999, pp. 1150每1157. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.1999.790410.
[45] R. Funayama, H. Yanagihara, L. Van Gool, T. Tuytelaars, H. Bay, Robust interest
point detector and descriptor, US 8,165,401 B2, 2006. https://www.google.
com/patents/US8165401.
[46] B.E. Boser, I.M. Guyon, V.N. Vapnik, A training algorithm for optimal margin
classifiers, in: Proc. Fifth Annu. ACM Work. Comput. Learn. Theory, ACM, 1992,
pp. 144每152. doi:10.1145/130385.130401.
[47] S.H. Walker, D.B. Duncan, Estimation of the probability of an event as
a function of several
independent variables, Biometrika 54 (1967) 167.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/2333860.
[48] D.R. Cox, The regression analysis of binary sequences, J. R. Stat. Soc. 20 (1958)
215每242. http://www.jstor.org/stable/2983890.
[49] LogMeIn, Xively, 2013. https://xively.com/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[50] Exosite, Exosite, 2013. http://exosite.com/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[51] LORD MicroStrain, Sensor Cloud, (n.d.). http://www.sensorcloud.com/ (ac-
cessed 29.07.15).
[52] Etherios, Etherios, 2008. http://www.etherios.com/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[53] ThingWorxTM , ThingWorx, 2015. http://www.thingworx.com/
(accessed
29.07.15).
[54] Carriots, Carriots, 2011. https://www.carriots.com/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[55] Microsoft, Azure IoT Suit, 2015. http://www.microsoft.com/en-us/server-
cloud/internet-of-things/azure-iot-suite.aspx (accessed 30.11.15).
[56] Amazon, AWS IoT, (n.d.). https://aws.amazon.com/es/iot/how-it-works/ (ac-
cessed 27.11.15).
[57] IBM,
IBM Internet of things, 2015. http://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/
internet- of- things/ (accessed 30.11.15).
[58] S.R.L. Paraimpu, Paraimpu, 2012. http://paraimpu.crs4.it/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[59] QuadraSpace, 2010. http://www.quadraspace.org/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[60] A. Kansal, S. Nath, J. Liu, W.I. Grosky, SenseWeb: An infrastructure for shared
sensing, IEEE Multimed. 14 (2007) 8每13. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MMUL.
2007.82.
[61] Microsoft, SenseWeb, 2008. http://research.microsoft.com/en- Us/projects/
senseweb/. http://research.microsoft.com/en- us/projects/senseweb/.
[62] Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering (University of Cagliari),
SIoT, 2012. http://platform.social-iot.org/.

[63] Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Sensorpedia, 2009. http://www.sensorpedia.
com/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[64] B.L. Gorman, D.R. Resseguie, C. Tomkins-Tinch, Sensorpedia: Information shar-
ing across incompatible sensor systems, in: 2009 Int. Symp. Collab. Technol.
Syst., 2009, pp. 448每454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CTS.2009.5067513.
[65] EVRYTHNG,
EVRYTHNG,
2012. https://www.evrythng.com/
(accessed
29.07.15).
[66] Sen.se, Open.Sen.se, 2015. http://open.sen.se/ (accessed 29.07.15).
[67] IoBridge, Thingspeak, 2013. http://www.thingspeak.com (accessed 29.07.15).
[68] Nimbits Inc., Nimbits, 2015. http://www.nimbits.com (accessed 29.07.15).
[69] CyberVision Inc., KAA, 2014. http://www.kaaproject.org (accessed 29.07.15).
[70] W. Lorezo, R. Gonzalez-Crespo, A. Castillo-Sanz, A prototype for linear
features generalization, Int. J. Interact. Multimed. Artif. Intell. 1 (2010) 59.
http://dx.doi.org/10.9781/ijimai.2010.1310.
[71] D. Meana-Llori芍n, C. Gonz芍lez Garc赤a, B.C. Pelayo G-Bustelo, J.M. Cueva
Lovelle, V.H. Medina Garc赤a, IntelliSenses: Sintiendo Internet de las Cosas,
in: 2016 11th Iber. Conf. Inf. Syst. Technol., AISTI, Gran Canaria, Spain, 2016,
pp. 234每239. http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CISTI.2016.7521551.
[72] Alejandro F. Reimondo, Haar Cascades, (n.d.). http://alereimondo.no- ip.org/
OpenCV/34 (accessed 19.12.16).
[73] M. Castrill車n-Santana, O. D谷niz-Su芍rez, L. Ant車n-Canal赤s, J. Navarro-Lorenzo,
Face and Facial Feature Detection Evaluation: Performance Evaluation of
Public Domain Haar Detectors for Face and Facial Feature Detection, Visapp
2008. 2008, pp. 167每172. http://mozart.dis.ulpgc.es/Gias/Publications/visapp-
2008-1.pdf.

Cristian Gonz芍lez Garc赤a is a Technical Engineering in
Computer Systems and M.S. in Web Engineering from
School of Computer Engineering of Oviedo in 2011 and
2013 (University of Oviedo, Spain). Currently, he is a Ph.D.
candidate in Computers Science.
His research interests are in the field of the Internet of
Things, Smart Objects, Web Engineering, Mobile Devices,
Video games, and Modelling Software with DSL and MDE.

Daniel Meana-Llori芍n is a Graduated Engineering in
Computer Systems and M.S. in Web Engineering from
School of Computer Engineering of Oviedo in 2014 and
2016 (University of Oviedo, Spain). Currently, he is a Ph.D.
candidate in Computer Science.
His research interests include Mobile technologies,
Web Engineering, the Internet of Things and exploration
of emerging technologies related with the previous ones.

B. Cristina Pelayo G-Bustelo is a Lecturer in the Computer

Science Department of the University of Oviedo. Ph.D. from
the University of Oviedo in Computer Engineering.
Her research interests include Object-Oriented tech-
nology, Web Engineering, eGovernment, and Modeling
Software with BPM, DSL, and MDA.

Juan Manuel Cueva Lovelle is a Mining Engineer from

Oviedo Mining Engineers Technical School in 1983 (Oviedo
University, Spain). Ph.D. from Madrid Polytechnic Univer-
sity, Spain (1990). From 1985, he is Professor of the Lan-
guages and Computers Systems Area in Oviedo University
(Spain). ACM and IEEE voting member.
His research interests include Object-Oriented tech-
nology, Language Processors, Human每Computer Interface,
Web Engineering, and Modelling Software with BPM, DSL,
and MDA.

Nestor Garcia-Fernandez is a Tenure Associate Professor
at the Computer Science Department of the University of
Oviedo. Ms in Computer Science from the Technical School
of Computer Science of the University of Malaga. Ph.D.
from Computer Science Department of the University of
Oviedo.
His main research interests are Object-Oriented Tech-
nologies, Distributed Systems, and Object-Oriented Virtual
Machines.

