Water desalination using visible light by disperse red 1 modied PTFE membrane

Masahiro Fujiwara

National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (Tohoku Center), 4-2-1 Nigatake, Miyagino-ku, Sendai, Miyagi 983-8551, Japan

H I G H L I G H T S


Water permeated through DR1 modi-
ed PTFE membrane by visible light ir-
radiation.
Water penetration through the mem-
brane took place with photo isomeriza-
tion of DR1.
Desalination of NaCl solution was
achieved by the light induced mem-
brane permeation.
Simulated solar light from solar simula-
tor was effective for the water desalina-
tion.

article

info



Article history:
Received 19 August 2016
Received in revised form 1 November 2016
Accepted 1 November 2016
Available online 10 November 2016

Keywords:
Water treatment
Solar desalination
PTFE membrane
Repetitive photo isomerization
Disperse red 1

abstract

Water purication and seawater desalination are current desired technologies because global water shortage be-
comes more serious. As this problem is related to global warming, the energy for the processes should be covered
by renewable energies like solar light. It was found recently that water droplets on azobenzene modied anod-
ized alumina membranes permeate the membrane under light irradiation to be puried and desalinated. This
paper reports an advanced system of the light induced water treatment, where disperse red 1 (DR1) modied
PTFE (polytetrauoroethylene) membranes are employed. Hydrophobic PTFE membrane inhibits the natural in-
ltration of raw water into the membrane to prevent the contamination of treated water. Disperse red 1 photo-
isomerizes only with visible light to adopt to the utilization of solar light. Waters on the DR1 modied PTFE mem-
brane penetrated the membrane under visible light irradiation. 3.5% NaCl solution was desalinated to puried
water (b 0.01% NaCl) by the membrane permeation process. A simulated solar light of a solar simulator was
very effective for this desalination to produce claried water from an articial seawater. These results indicate
that solar desalination is realizable with the DR1 modied PTFE membrane by the direct irradiation of solar
light to the membrane.

 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Water purication and seawater desalination are now globally im-
portant technologies. As the shortage of fresh water is involved with
global warming (climate change) by the consumption of fossil fuels
and the resulting carbon dioxide emission, renewable energies,
especially solar light, free from fossil fuels should be employed for these
water treatments [1每4]. Recently, the energy of light is actively applied
to water purication processes using light-to-heat conversion materials,
which promote the steam generation by water evaporation under light
irradiation [5每11]. For example, Au plasmonic nanoparticle enables lo-
calized heating and efcient water evaporation [6]. Titanium nitride
nanoparticles as a lossy plasmonic nano-resonator are reported to be
more active than gold nanoparticles for light induced steam generation
[7]. Carbon materials based uids are also claimed to be effective for the
direct vapor generation with solar light [8]. As the steams thus formed
by water evaporation must be recovered from the plate located above
water pools containing these heating materials, the corresponding
water purication apparatuses are essentially regarded as variations of
solar still system, which generally requires complicated equipments to
collect vaporized and condensed water [12,13]. The puried water con-
densed on the undersurface of transparent plate above raw water must
be recovered carefully without its dripping into the raw water. This
complicated operation is thought to prohibit the progress of the solar
still. Membrane materials are also studied for the heat generation
under light irradiation. For example, photo thermal membranes based
on poly-pyrrole coated stainless steel mesh [9] and three layered mem-
branes consisting TiO2 nanoparticles, Au nanoparticles and anodized
aluminum oxides [10] are studied for vapor generation. Double-layer
structure consisting of a carbon foam layer supporting an exfoliated
graphite layer is active for vapor generation as well [11]. However,
even in these cases, no water vapors produced by the heating processes
penetrate the membranes, and the recovery manners of the treated wa-
ters are essentially similar to the solar still [1每4,12,13]. Therefore, sim-
pler systems of puried water production, especially in the recovery of
the treated water, are desired for the practical water treatments with
light energy.
The application of azobenzene modied materials to control mass
transport and diffusion under light irradiation are previously reported
[14,15]. For example, the release of cholesterol from an azobenzene-
tethered mesoporous silica powder is promoted by the simultaneous ir-
radiation of UV and visible lights [14]. The ow rate of organic solvents
through an azobenzene modied silica gel column can be accelerated by
the same simultaneous light irradiation [15]. The UV and visible lights
isomerize the azobenzene molecules from trans to cis isomer and
from cis to trans isomer, respectively. The simultaneous irradiation of
these two lights induces the repetitive photo isomerization of the
azobenzene between the trans and cis isomer in the small spaces of sil-
ica pores, activating the movement of nearby molecules to enhance
their transfer. Although the molecular motions of azobenzene deriva-
tives are well utilized for some intelligent and functional materials
[16每18], the applications of these repetitive photo isomerizations are
not so often reported [19每21]. Recently, azobenzene modied anodized
alumina membranes were employed for a light promoted mass transfer
[22]. When a water droplet on the azobenzene modied membrane was
exposed to UV and visible lights, a certain volume of the water was re-
covered under the membrane by membrane penetration, while no
water permeation occurred without the UV and visible lights irradia-
tion. It is thought that the repetitive photo isomerization of azobenzene
elicited by the simultaneous irradiation provokes the evaporation of the
water to result in the membrane permeation of water. When the solu-
tions of rhodamine B and NaCl were used in the light induced mem-
brane permeation, the penetrated waters were puried or desalinated.
No rhodamine B was contained in the treated water and the salt water
was converted into fresh water. From these results, an installation of
seawater desalination using the azobenzene modied membrane
under solar light irradiation was proposed in the paper [22]. Fig. 1 illus-
trates the concept of this system that seawater in a pool on an
azobenzene modied membrane is exposed to solar light to produce
puried desalinated water under the membrane, which is readily col-
lected in the container under the membrane. In this system, the energy
for seawater desalination is provided from solar light.

Fig. 1. A proposed membrane seawater desalination equipment using solar light energy.

In the system of Fig. 1, the natural dropping-down of seawater
through the membrane must be avoided for preventing the contamina-
tion of the desalinated water under the membrane. In this point, the an-
odized alumina membrane is not suitable because of its hydrophilic and
fragile property. The hydrophilicity facilitates the natural dropping-
down of raw water and the fragility is unfavorable in large scale sys-
tems. On the other hand, 4-phenylazophenol mainly employed as the
azobenzene compound in the previous paper [22] is inappropriate in
the system of Fig. 1 using solar light, because its photo isomerization
from trans to cis isomer requires UV light with wavelength of 350 nm
that is scarcely contained in solar light. Then, this paper reports an im-
proved light
induced water
treatment process, where PTFE
(polytetrauoroethylene) membrane that is highly hydrophobic and
more robust than the anodized alumina membrane and disperse red 1
(DR1) that photo-isomerizes only with visible light of wavelength
from 420 to 550 nm (Fig. 2) [23每27] were employed as alternative
membrane and azobenzene compound, respectively. DR1 is known as
a water-insoluble azobenzene dye, which is protable for preventing
the contamination of treated water with DR1. This paper also presents
the desalination of 3.5% NaCl solution and an articial seawater using
the DR1 modied PTFE membrane under a simulated solar light,
which is an important step toward the direct solar desalination using
the system shown in Fig. 1.

2. Experimental section

2.1. Materials

Polytetrauoroethylene (PTFE) membranes used in this study were
Advantec PTFE membrane lters from Toyo Roshi Kaisha, 47 mm in di-
ameter and 0.8 米m or 3.0 米m of pore size. Polyethersulfone (PES) mem-
brane was PES membrane lter of As One Corporation (47 mm in
diameter). Disperse
red 1 [N-ethyl-N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-4-(4-
nitrophenylazo)aniline] (Fig. 2) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich
Co. LLC. MARINE ART SF-1 for articial seawater [28] was bought from
Osaka Yakken Co., Ltd. Other organic reagents and NaCl (special
grade) were obtained from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.

2.2. Preparation of disperse red 1 modied membranes

After wetting a sheet of PTFE membrane lter with isopropanol,
2 mL of 0.1 g/mL solution of disperse red 1 (DR1) in DMF (N,N-
dimethylformamide) was embrocated to the membrane lter in a

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

81

OH

N

NN

N

N

O 2 N

O 2 N

N

OH

remosisnarT

remosisiC

Fig. 2. Photo isomerization of disperse red 1 (DR1).

Teon vessel. After 3 days, the membrane was taken from the vessel and
heated at 40 ∼C for 1 day in air. This membrane was immersed in 50 mL
of distillated water for 1 day. This washing treatment was repeated until
the concentration of DR1 in the washing water decreased to b 1 ppb
monitored by spectrometer analysis (using JASCO V-530 spectrometer).
The concentration of DR1 in the rst washing water was b 1 ppb in near-
ly every cases. The membrane thus treated was nally dried at 40 ∼C for
1 day. DR1 modied PTFE membranes using the membranes with 0.8 or
3.0 米m of pore size were named as Memb-1 and Memb-2, respectively.
DR1 modied PTFE membrane using 1 mL of a diluted DR1 solution
(0.05 g/mL) was named as Memb-3. Double modied membrane
(Memb-4) was obtained from a single modied PTFE membrane (one
Memb-1 membrane) by the direct recoating with 0.5 mL solution of
DR1 in DMF (0.1 g/mL) for 4 day. The following treatment was the
same as above. DR1 modied PES membrane (Memb-5) was prepared
by the immersion of a PES membrane in 2 mL of 0.1 g/mL isopropanol
solution of DR1, because the PES membrane is soluble in DMF. Other
procedures were the same as the DR1 modied PTFE membrane.

2.3. Procedures of membrane permeation of distilled water

The experiments of water permeation through membranes were
performed with the apparatus system shown in Fig. 3. The membrane
(47 mm in diameter) on a Teon holding ring platform (37 mm in ex-
ternal diameter, 33 mm in internal diameter and 3 mm thick) was put
into a glass petri dish. On the nearly central part of the membrane,
0.5 mL of distilled water was dropped slowly (Fig. 4). The contact area
of the droplet with the membrane was approximately 1.1 cm2 (roughly
a circle of diameter 1.2 cm). In all tests using PTFE membranes, the con-
tact areas of 0.5 mL of water were the same. A watch glass was overlaid
on the petri dish. This watch glass transmits visible light, but lters out
UV light. This apparatus system was placed in a dark space for obscuring
room light. In all experiments, the system was not cooled purposefully.

Visible light irradiation was carried out using a xenon light source MAX-
301 (300 W xenon lamp; Asahi Spectra Co. Ltd.) equipped with a VIS
mirror module (Asahi Spectra Co. Ltd.), which controls the irradiated
light mainly in the range of from 385 to 740 nm in wavelength. This mir-
ror module efciently eliminates near-infrared light from xenon lamp to
be free from its heat effect. The distance between the lamp bottom and
the membrane was xed to approximately 30 mm in the case of the vis-
ible light irradiation. The light was irradiated to the whole water (see
Graphical Abstract). The irradiation of a light with wavelength of
440 nm was achieved by using a corresponding bandpass lters. After
the light irradiation, the temperature of the remained water on mem-
brane was measured with a sharpened thermocouple promptly, and
the water was removed with a syringe to determine the volume by its
scale. After picking up the membrane, the volumes of water on the bot-
tom of the petri dish under the membrane and of water on the under-
surface of the watch glass above the membrane were estimated with
suitable microsyringes for HPLC, which could collect the water effective-
ly by their at needle tip. When a solar simulator (Fiber Solar Simulator
XEF-300, SAN-EI ELECTRIC CO., LTD.) was used, the light intensity at the
surface of the membrane was xed at 1 SUN, where the distance be-
tween the lamp bottom and the membrane was approximately
220 mm. Other procedures were the same as the case of the xenon
light source. On the other hand, 0.5 mL of water put on DR1 modied
PES membrane did not form a droplet to be seeped into the whole
membrane.

2.4. Procedures of desalination of NaCl solution and articial seawater

In the desalination experiment of NaCl solution, 3.5% NaCl solution
prepared from NaCl and ultrapure water was used. An articial seawa-
ter was obtained from MARINE ART SF-1 [28] and ultrapure water.
The light induced water permeation was performed by the same

Fig. 3. Schematic diagram of the experimental apparatus of water membrane permeation.

Fig. 4. A droplet of distillated water (0.5 mL) on a DR1 modied PTFE membrane.

82

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

manner as the case of distilled water. After measuring the volume of
permeated water under the membrane, the electric conductivity of
the water and the corresponding NaCl concentration were analyzed
by a conductance meter, B-771 LAQUAtwin compact conductivity
meter (HORIBA, Ltd). As the volumes of the permeated water were in-
sufcient for the conductivity meter (minimum volume: approximately
120 米L), additional water (100每150 米L of distilled water; electric con-
ductivity: 1每3 米S/cm) was mixed to the permeated water. After measur-
ing the electric conductivity of the mixed water, the corrected electric
conductivity of the permeated water was calculated by multiplying
the electric conductivity by the reciprocal number of the dilution ratio.
As the electric conductivity (and NaCl concentration) in the additional
distilled water was not considered in this correction, the true value of
the electric conductivity of the permeated water must be less than the
value thus calculated. In the repeated experiments, NaCl solution on
the membrane was replaced by fresh NaCl solution in each run. Howev-
er, the membrane was not washed before the following experiment, be-
cause the washing of the membrane after each experiment that
removes NaCl in the membrane is not suitable for evaluating the inu-
ence of NaCl fouling on the reproducibility of desalination. The repeated
experiment with the articial seawater was performed in the same
manner as the NaCl solution.

2.5. Sample characterization

The absorption spectra of solutions were analyzed by JASCO V-530
spectrometer. The diffuse reectance UV每vis spectra of the membranes
were recorded with JASCO V-550 spectrophotometer equipped with an
integrating sphere. Kubelka-Munk function was used to indicate the dif-
fuse reectance spectra of membranes. The images of scanning electron
microscope (SEM) were obtained by JSM-6390 (JEOL).

3. Results and discussion

3.1. Preparation of disperse red 1 modied PTFE membranes

At rst, the natural dropping-down of water through PTFE mem-
brane was tested using the experiment apparatus shown in Fig. 3.
After 0.5 mL of distilled water was put on a non-modied PTFE mem-
brane for 1 h in a dark place, no water was found under the membrane
and the whole volume of the water was remained on the membrane.
Even after 5 h, nearly whole volume of the water was recovered on

the membrane. Thus, no natural permeation of water through the
PTFE membrane was conrmed.
In the previous research [22],
azobenzene derivatives are tethered onto the surface of anodized alu-
mina membrane using a silane coupling reagent, because the alumina
surface is applicable to the surface grafting process with the silane re-
agent. However, as the surface of PTFE is unsuitable for this surface
modication, a simple embrocation of DMF solutions of DR1 onto PTFE
membrane was applied. The images of some membranes are shown in
Fig. 5. The white original PTFE membrane (Fig. 5A) colored to dark red
by the modication of DR1 (Fig. 5B; Memb-1). When this DR1 modied
membrane was immersed in acetone, DR1 was gradually eliminated
from the membrane. It is thought that the binding mode between DR1
and PTFE is simple absorption. However, the elution of DR1 into water
was negligible in soaking test in distilled water according to the visible
spectra of the treated water solution. The DR1 modied membrane
using a diluted solution (Memb-3) had a lighter red color than the
membrane Memb-1. Fig. 6 compares the spectra of solar light (line A)
and DR1. The spectrum of DR1 acetonitrile solution (line B) had the
peak absorption around 500 nm in wavelength, which isomerizes DR1
from trans to cis isomer. The photo isomerization from cis to trans iso-
mer occurs under visible light irradiation with wavelength of longer
than 530 nm [27]. As this visible light is the strongest component of
solar light, DR1 is expected to absorb the solar light with high efciency.
In the diffuse reectance spectrum of DR1 modied PTFE membrane
(Memb-1) in Kubelka-Munk function (line C), the absorption peak of
the membrane was shifted to shorter wavelength (approximately
440 nm). As the wavelength of the absorption peak of DR1 solutions is
signicantly affected by the solvents used [27], it seems that the interac-
tion of DR1 with PTFE resulted in this blue shift. However, the photo
isomerization of DR1 from trans to cis isomer is possible only by visible
light even in the PTFE membrane. On the other hand, DR1 modied PES
membrane (Memb-5) is in clear light red color (Fig. 5E), which had the
absorption peak at approximately the same wavelength as the DR1 so-
lution (line D of Fig. 6).
To the membrane Memb-1, visible light with wavelength of 440 nm
was irradiated for observing the photo isomerization of DR1 on PTFE
membrane. The diffuse reectance UV每vis spectra of the membrane
are shown in Fig. 7. The absorption around 440 nm in wavelength grad-
ually decreased with the irradiation time (Fig. 7A). Thus, the photo
isomerization of DR1 on the surface of PTFE membrane from trans to
cis isomer by the light irradiation was ascertained. When visible light
with wavelength ranging from 385 to 740 nm was irradiated to the

Fig. 5. (A) Original PTFE membrane, (B) DR1 modied PTFE membrane (pore size: 0.8 米m: Memb-1), (C) DR1 modied PTFE membrane with diluted solution (Memb-3), (D) Original PES
membrane, and (E) DR1 modied PES membrane (Memb-5).

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

83

k

n
u

M

-

a

k

l

e
b
u

K

,

n
o

i

t

p

r

o

s

b

A

,

e

c

i

n
a
d
a

r
r

I

Wavelength / nm

Fig. 6. (A) Spectra of solar light (Irradiance), (B) DR1 in acetonitrile (Absorption), (C)
diffuse reectance spectrum of DR1 modied PTFE membrane (Memb-1; Kubelka-
Munk), and (D) diffuse reectance spectrum of DR1 modied PES membrane (Memb-5;
Kubelka-Munk). The values of Y-axis are adjusted.

membrane for 10 min, the decrease of the absorption around 440 nm
was the same as the irradiation of 440 nm for 60 min (Fig. 7B). The
light with a wider range of wavelength promoted the photo isomeriza-
tion much more than that only of 440 nm. The longer irradiation of the
visible light for 60 min decreased the absorption moderately. It is
thought that the photo isomerization between trans and cis isomer
reached a steady state in 10 min.

3.2. Light induced water permeation through disperse red 1 modied
membranes

The light induced water permeation through membranes was next
examined. At the beginning, the non-modied PTFE (original PTFE)
membrane was tested. A droplet of 0.5 mL of distillated water was put
on the central area of the membrane as shown in Fig. 3, and the visible
light (from 385 to 740 nm in wavelength) was irradiated to the whole
water. After 1 h irradiation, water was found neither on the bottom of
the petri dish under the membrane (permeated water) nor on the un-
dersurface of the watch glass above the membrane (vaporized water).
The volume of the water remained on the PTFE membrane was approx-
imately 0.5 mL to indicate the complete recovery of the water put on the
membrane. Thus, no permeation of water through the non-modied
PTFE membrane occurred even under the visible light irradiation.

k
n
u

M

-

l

a
k
e
b
u

K

Table 1
Water permeation and desalination under visible light irradiation.a

Membrane

Memb-1
Memb-1b
Memb-1c
Memb-2
Memb-3
Memb-4
Memb-1d
Memb-1e
Memb-1d,e
Memb-1e,f

Under
membrane
(米L)

Above
membrane
(米L)

Remain on
membrane
(mL)

18
9
66
18
6
29
18
30
26
32

4
b 2
16
5
b 2
12
6
5
5
5

0.47
0.49
0.41
0.45
0.49
0.43
0.46
0.43
0.45
0.43

Electric
conductivity
(米S/cm)
每
每
每
每
每
每
92 (b 0.01)g
每
87 (b 0.01)g
54

a 0.5 mL of deionized water was put on membrane. Irradiation of visible light with
wavelength from 385 to 740 nm for 1 h.
b Irradiation for 0.5 h.
c Irradiation for 3 h.
d 3.5% NaCl solution was used.
e Irradiation from a solar simulator at 1 SUN.
f Articial seawater obtained from MARINE ART SF-1 was used.
g Concentration of NaCl (%).

Next, the DR1 modied PTFE membranes were applied to the light in-
duced water membrane permeation. The results are summarized in
Table 1. When no irradiation (in dark place) and the irradiation of visi-
ble light of 440 nm controlled by a band pass lter were used for 1 h,
neither the permeated water nor the vaporized water was observed
and nearly 0.5 mL of water was remained on the membrane. Moreover,
no temperature elevation of the water was observed in both cases. Thus,
no irradiation and the irradiation of the light that isomerizes DR1 only
from trans to cis isomer had no effect for the water permeation through
the membrane. On the other hand, after 1 h irradiation of visible light
with wavelength from 385 to 740 nm, the volume of the water
remained on the membrane decreased to approximately 0.47 mL
(470 米L) and the temperature of the water was elevated slightly
(about 4 ∼C increase). The content of DR1 in the remained water was
b 0.1 ppb to indicate no leaching of DR1 from the membrane. As men-
tioned in the introduction part, DR1 is a water-insoluble azobenzene
dye. Water dews were found both on the bottom of the petri dish
formed by the water permeation of the membrane (permeated water)
and on the undersurface of the watch glass by the vaporization (vapor-
ized water). The volumes of the permeated and vaporized waters were
approximately 18 and 4 米L, respectively. No DR1 was detected even in
the permeated and vaporized waters according to spectrometer
analyses.
The light irradiation for 0.5 h and 3 h produced 9 and 66 米L of waters
under the membrane, respectively. The volume of the permeated water

k
n
u

M

-

l

a
k
e
b
u

K

Fig. 7. (A) Diffuse reectance spectra of DR1 modied PTFE membrane (Memb-1) under the irradiation of visible light with wavelength of 440 nm (Kubelka-Munk). (B) Diffuse reectance
spectra of DR1 modied PTFE membrane (Memb-1) under the irradiation of visible light with wavelength of 385每740 nm or 440 nm (dot-line) (Kubelka-Munk).

Wavelength / nm

Wavelength / nm

84

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

increased basically with the irradiation time. However, the temperature
elevation of the water remained on the membrane was only 6 ∼C even
after 3 h irradiation. The reproducibility of the water permeation was
veried by the repeated experiments of 1 h irradiation. In ve trials,
the volumes of the permeated and vaporized waters were in the range
of 16每21 米L and 4每7 米L, respectively. No deterioration of the permeation
ability occurred in these repeated experiments. The DR1 modied
membrane obtained from a PTFE membrane with a larger pore
(3.0 米m; Memb-2) resulted in the similar result to Memb-1. The pore
size of the PTFE membrane is unlikely to be an important factor in this
membrane permeation. On the other hand, when the DR1 modied
PTFE membrane prepared with a diluted solution of DR1 (Memb-3)
was used (The color was lighter than that of Memb-1 to show less
DR1 on the membrane as shown in Fig. 5C.), the volumes of the perme-
ated and vaporized waters decreased to 6 and 1.5 米L, respectively. The
double modication of DR1 to PTFE membrane (Memb-4) improved
the water penetration ability to increase the volume of the permeated
water from 18 to 29 米L. Thus, the modication manner of DR1 on PTFE
membrane was a signicant factor for the performance of the light in-
duced water permeation.
DR1 modied PES membrane (Memb-5) was also tried to the mem-
brane permeation of water. When 0.5 mL of distilled water was put on
this membrane, the water gradually seeped into the membrane to
spread to the whole membrane after a period of time, probably because
PES membrane is generally hydrophilic. After 1 h in dark place, a certain
volume of water was found between the membrane and the Teon
holding ring platform (see Fig. 3). This water was thought to penetrate
through the membrane naturally, while no water was observed be-
tween the PTFE membrane and the ring platform. This PES membrane
could not prevent the natural dropping-down of water through the
membrane, which must be avoided for preventing the contamination
of the puried water with raw water. Therefore, the light induced mem-
brane permeation using the DR1 modied PES membrane (Memb-5)
was not tested. The employment of hydrophobic membrane must be es-
sential for the light induced membrane permeation.

3.3. Light induced desalination with disperse red 1 modied PTFE
membranes

Water desalination using the DR1 modied PTFE membrane was
next examined. 3.5% NaCl aqueous solution (0.5 mL) was put on the
DR1 modied PTFE membrane (Memb-1), and the visible light with
wavelength from 385 to 740 nm was irradiated. After 1 h, about 18
and 6 米L of waters were observed both on the bottom of the petri dish
and on the undersurface of the watch glass. Approximately 0.46 mL of
the NaCl solution was remained on the membrane. These results were
nearly the same as those using distillated water. The estimated value
of the electric conductivity of the permeated water under the mem-
brane was 92 米S/cm, which corresponded to b 0.01% of NaCl concentra-
tion. The purity of the water recovered under the membrane reached a
high enough level of freshwater (b 0.05% NaCl). Thus, the DR1 modied
PTFE membrane accomplished the desalination of the NaCl solution by
the visible light irradiation. This light induced permeation of the NaCl
solution was repeated three more times without washing the mem-
brane (NaCl solution on the membrane was replaced in each case).
The results in these three experiments were in the same ranges as the
rst experiment.
The mechanism of the water permeation by light irradiation is
thought to be similar to the previous case [22]. The irradiated light
causes the repetitive photo isomerization of DR1 between its trans
and cis isomer. The molecular motion of DR1 induced by the photo
isomerization activates water molecule located near DR1 on PTFE mem-
brane to promote their evaporation. Finally, the water vapor penetrates
the pore of PTFE membrane. In this study, the employments both of
PTFE membrane and DR1 evolved this light induced water permeation
and desalination system. The hydrophobic PTFE membrane efciently

rejected the natural penetration of water through the membrane and
DR1 that photo-isomerizes by the light with wavelength of N 440 nm en-
ables the utilization of visible light. As the permeated water through the
membrane is produced via water vapor, the recovered water under the
membrane was puried and desalinated.
This membrane permeation and the desalination of water is differ-
ent from the common water evaporation systems like solar still [12,
13], because the treated water could be readily collected under the
membrane. In addition, as the temperature elevation of the water on
membrane was modest as mentioned above (up to 6 ∼C increase), the
mechanism of water evaporation on the DR1 modied membranes
using visible light is different from that of light-to-heat conversion ma-
terials, because the materials rapidly elevate the temperature of water
to produce steam [5每11]. The water treatment using the DR1 modied
PTFE membranes resembles the process of membrane distillation [29每
35], especially air-gap membrane distillation [34,35]. In the membrane
distillation, the permeation of water vapor through hydrophobic mem-
brane desalinates raw water, where the inhibition of the penetration of
liquid water by hydrophobic membrane is a key function. While the raw
water is often heated by articial energy in common membrane distilla-
tion [29每35], solar energy is utilized in some recent systems, where
heated water is produced in solar thermal systems separated from the
membrane distillation part [32,33]. To the contrary, the membrane per-
meation in this study employed light energy directly in the membrane
process. The droplet of raw water on the DR1 modied membrane
was exposed directly to the irradiated light. Therefore, the total water
treatment system can be simplied and is suitable for the direct use of
solar light energy.

3.4. Seawater desalination with PTFE membranes using solar simulator

The wavelength and intensity of the irradiated light controlled by
the VIS mirror module is approximately constant from 400 to 750 nm
in wavelength, which is apparently different from real solar light on
the surface of the ground. Then, a simulated solar light irradiated from
a solar simulator (XEF-300, SAN-EI ELECTRIC CO., LTD.) was used for
the light induced membrane permeation of water, because a goal of
this research is seawater desalination using real solar light free from fos-
sil fuel energy. The simulated solar light was irradiated to 0.5 mL of dis-
tilled water on the DR1 modied PTFE membrane (Memb-1) at 1 SUN.
After 1 h irradiation, 30 米L of water, which was much more than that
with the visible light (from 385 to 740 nm), was found on the petri
dish under the membrane. As shown in Fig. 6, the absorption range of
the DR1 modied PTFE membrane is suitable for the utilization of
solar light. When the solar light was employed to the permeation of
3.5% NaCl solution, 26 米L of water was obtained under the membrane.
The electric conductivity of the permeated water was 87 米S/cm and
the concentration of NaCl was b 0.01%. As the salinity of the water is
equivalent to fresh water, the desalination of the NaCl solution using
the simulated solar light certainly succeeded. This desalination experi-
ment was repeated totally ve times without washing the membrane
in the same manner as that described above. In all ve experiments,
the volumes of the permeated waters were within the range of 22每
26 米L, and their salinities were b 0.01%. Thus, the desalination process
is repeatable with no obvious deterioration of the performance of the
membrane. Fig. 8 illustrates the scanning electron microscope (SEM)
images of original PTFE membrane, DR1 modied PTFE membrane be-
fore use, and DR1 modied PTFE membrane after the utilization for
the repeated permeation of NaCl solution. There are no clear differences
among these three images. The modication of DR1 to the PTFE mem-
brane did not change the morphology of the membrane from Fig. 8A
and B. In the image of the used membrane (Fig. 8C), no observable foul-
ing materials were found on the membrane. This membrane desalina-
tion effectively suppressed the salt fouling to achieve no deterioration
of the membrane performance.

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

85

Fig. 8. SEM images of PTFE membranes. (A) Original PTFE membrane, (B) DR1 modied PTFE membrane before used, and (C) DR1 modied PTFE membrane after the use for the repeated
permeation of NaCl solution.

At the end, an articial seawater obtained with MARINE ART SF-1,
whose composition formula of minerals is the same as that of real sea-
water [28], was employed. This articial seawater well duplicates real
surface seawater. For example, the pH value of the articial seawater
was 8.1 that is the same as that of current real surface seawater [36].
On the other hand, 3.5% NaCl solution used in this study had a pH
value of 5.4. As listed in Table 1, the volume of the permeated water
was 32 米L by the irradiation of the simulated solar light. The electric con-
ductivity of the permeated water was 54 米S/cm to be desalinated to pu-
ried fresh water. In the same repeated experiments as the NaCl
solution, the volumes of the permeated water and their electric conduc-
tivity were within the range of 32每36 米L and of 39每54 米S/cm, respec-
tively. Thus, the desalination of an articial seawater succeeded by a
simulated solar light without deterioration.

4. Conclusions

This paper reports the light induced water permeation using DR1
(disperse red 1) modied PTFE membranes. Hydrophobic PTFE mem-
brane prevents the natural inltration of raw water into the membrane
completely, while it can happen in anodized alumina membrane report-
ed before [22]. DR1 conducts its repetitive photo isomerization only by
visible light, requiring no UV light that is scarcely contained in solar
light. The permeation of distilled water through the DR1 modied
PTFE membrane took place under the irradiation of visible light (from
385 to 740 nm), while no penetration occurred without the light. 3.5%
NaCl solution and an articial seawater also permeated the membrane
under the light irradiation, and the recovered water under the mem-
brane was sufciently desalinated. The electric conductivity and the
concentration of NaCl of the permeated water were b 100 米S/cm and
0.01%, respectively. As the salinity of freshwater is b 0.05%, this light in-
duced water permeation efciently converted the NaCl solution to a de-
salinated freshwater. The water permeation and desalination were also
accomplished by a simulated solar light, where the concentration of
NaCl in the penetrated water decreased to b 0.01% as well. In addition,
the desalination of an articial seawater to puried water was achieved
by the light irradiation with a solar simulator. These results clearly show
that the desalination process using solar light as a main energy source
shown in Fig. 1 is realizable by the DR1 modied PTFE membrane. The
most important advantage of the DR1 modied PTFE membranes is
that the desalination of seawater as the most energy-requiring step is
accomplished only by solar light energy, which extensively decreases
the consumption of fossil fuels in the whole desalination process.

Acknowledgement

This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientic Research
(Grant Number: 16H03002) from the Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS). MF thanks for Dr. Mitsuhiro Kanakubo (AIST), Dr.
Yoshio Masuda (AIST), Prof. Shingo Matsukawa (Tokyo University of

Marine Science and Technology), and Mr. Masaki Kikuchi (Tohoku
Gakuin University) for their helps.

References

[1] A.A. El-Sebaii, E. El-Bialy, Advanced designs of solar desalination systems: a review,
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 49 (2015) 1198每1212.
[2] J.H. Reif, W. Alhalabi, Solar-thermal powered desalination: its signicant challenges
and potential, Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 48 (2015) 152每165.
[3] H. Sharon, K.S. Reddy, A review of solar energy driven desalination technologies,
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 41 (2015) 1080每1118.
[4] C. Li, Y. Goswami, E. Stefanakos, Solar assisted sea water desalination: a review,
Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 19 (2013) 136每163.
[5] A.O. Govorov, H.H. Richardson, Generating heat with metal nanoparticles, Nano
Today 2 (2007) 30每38.
[6] N.J. Hogan, A.S. Urban, C. Ayala-Orozco, A. Pimpinelli, P. Nordlander, N.J. Halas,
Nanoparticles heat through light localization, Nano Lett. 14 (2014) 4640每4645.
[7] S. Ishii, R.P. Sugavaneshwar, T. Nagao, Titanium nitride nanoparticles as plasmonic
solar heat transducers, J. Phys. Chem. C 120 (2016) 2343每2348.
[8] G. Ni, N. Miljkovic, H. Ghasemi, X. Huang, S.V. Boriskina, C.-T. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Xu,
M.M. Rahman, T.-J. Zhang, G. Chen, Volumetric solar heating of nanouids for direct
vapor generation, Nano Energy 17 (2015) 290每301.
[9] L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li, P. Wang, Hydrophobic light-to-heat conversion mem-
branes with self-healing ability for interfacial solar heating, Adv. Mater. 27 (2015)
4889每4894.
[10] Y. Liu, J. Lou, M. Ni, C. Song, J. Wu, N.P. Dasgupta , P. Tao, W. Shang, T. Deng,
Bioinspired bifunctional membrane for efcient clean water generation, ACS Appl.
Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 772每779.
[11] H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A.M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic, G. Chen, Solar
steam generation by heat localization, Nature Commun. 5 (2014) 4449.
[12] A. Kaushal, Varun, Solar stills: a review, Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 14 (2010) 446每453.
[13] A.E. Kabeel, S.A. El-Agouz, Review of researches and developments on solar stills,
Desalination 276 (2011) 1每12.
[14] Y. Zhu, M. Fujiwara, Installing dynamic molecular photomechanics in mesopore: a
multifunctional controlled-release nanosystem, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 46 (2007)
2241每2244.
[15] M. Fujiwara, M. Akiyama, M. Hata, K. Shiokawa, R. Nomura, Photo induced acceler-
ation of efuent rate of developing solvents in azobenzene tethered silica gel, ACS
Nano 2 (2008) 1671每1681.
[16] A. Natansohn, P. Rochon, Photoinduced motions in azo-containing polymers, Chem.
Rev. 102 (2002) 4139每4175.
[17] G. Vives, J.M. Tour, Synthesis of single-molecule nanocars, Acc. Chem. Res. 42 (2009)
473每487.
[18] J.M. Abendroth, O.S. Bushuyev, P.S. Weiss, C.J. Barrett, Controlling motion at the
nanoscale: rise of the molecular machines, ACS Nano 9 (2015) 7746每7768.
[19] S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Vgtle, L. De Cola, J.I. Zink, Photo-driven expulsion of molecules
from mesostructured silica nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C 111 (2007) 6589每6592.
[20] J. Lu, E. Choi, F. Tamanoi, J.I. Zink, Light-activated nanoimpeller-controlled drug re-
lease in cancer cells, Small 4 (2008) 421每426.
[21] J. Lu, W. Bu, L. Pan, J. Shi, NIR-triggered anticancer drug delivery by upconverting
nanoparticles with integrated azobenzene-modied mesoporous silica, Angew.
Chem. Int. Ed. 52 (2013) 4375每4379.
[22] M. Fujiwara, T. Imura, Photo induced membrane separation for water purication
and desalination using azobenzene modied anodized alumina membranes, ACS
Nano 9 (2015) 5705每5712.
[23] Z. Sekkat, D. Morichere, M. Dumont, R. Loucif-Saibi, J.A. Delaire, Photoisomerization
of azobenzene derivatives in polymeric thin lms, J. Appl. Phys. 71 (1992)
1543每1545.
[24] R. Loucif-Saibi, K. Nakatani, J.A. Delaire, M. Dumont, Z. Sekkat, Photoisomerization
and second harmonic generation in disperse red one-doped and -functionalized
poly(methyl methacrylate) lms, Chem. Mater. 5 (1993) 229每236.
[25] N. Bhm, A. Materny, W. Kiefer, H. Steins, M.M. M邦ller, G. Schottner, Spectroscopic
investigation of the thermal cis-trans isomerization of disperse red 1 in hybrid poly-
mers, Macromolecules 29 (1996) 2599每2604.

86

M. Fujiwara / Desalination 404 (2017) 79每86

[26] T. Buffeteau, F. Lagugn谷 Labarthet, M. P谷zolet, C. Sourisseau, Photoinduced orienta-
tion of azobenzene chromophores in amorphous polymers as studied by real-time
visible and FTIR spectroscopies, Macromolecules 31 (1998) 7312每7320.
[27] M. Poprawa-Smoluch, J. Baggerman, H. Zhang, H.P.A. Maas, L. De Cola, A.M. Brouwer,
Photoisomerization of disperse red 1 studied with transient absorption spectrosco-
py and quantum chemical calculations, J. Phys. Chem. A 110 (2006) 11926每11937.
[28] C. Fushimi, A. Umeda, Comparison of biodiesel production by a supercritical metha-
nol method from microalgae oil using solvent extraction and hydrothermal liquefac-
tion processes, Energy Fuel 30 (2016) 7916每7922.
[29] K.W. Lawson, D.R. Lloyd, Membrane distillation, J. Membr. Sci. 124 (1997) 1每25.
[30] A.M. Alklaibi, N. Lior, Membrane-distillation desalination: status and potential, De-
salination 171 (2004) 111每131.
[31] A. Alkhudhiri, N. Darwish, N. Hilal, Membrane distillation: a comprehensive review,
Desalination 287 (2012) 2每18.

[32] M. Khayet, Solar desalination by membrane distillation: dispersion in energy con-
sumption analysis and water production costs, (a review), Desalination 308
(2013) 89每101.
[33] A.M. Elzahaby, A.E. Kabeel, M.M. Bassuoni, A.R.A. Elbar, Direct contact membrane
water distillation assisted with solar energy, Energy Convers. Manag. 110 (2016)
397每406.
[34] G.W. Meindersma, C.M. Guijt, A.B. de Haan, Desalination and water recycling by air
gap membrane distillation, Desalination 187 (2006) 291每301.
[35] C. Feng, K.C. Khulbe, T. Matsuura, R. Gopal, S. Kaur, S. Ramakrishna, M. Khayet, Pro-
duction of drinking water from saline water by air-gap membrane distillation using
polyvinylidene uoride nanober membrane, J. Membr. Sci. 311 (2008) 1每6.
[36] P.N. Pearson, M.R. Palmer, Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations over the past
60 million years, Nature 406 (2000) 695每699.

